But remember, please, the Law by which we live,We are not built to comprehend a lie ...

--Rudyard Kipling,"The Secret of the Machines"

It was religious yearning granted hope, it was the holygrail of science. Our ambitions ran high and low--for acreation myth made real, for a monstrous act of self-love.As soon as it was feasible, we had no choice but to follow ourdesires and hang the consequences. In loftiest terms, we aimedto escape our mortality, confront or even replace the Godheadwith a perfect self. More practically, we intended to devise animproved, more modern version of ourselves and exult in thejoy of invention, the thrill of mastery. In the autumn of thetwentieth century, it came about at last, the first step towardsthe fulfilment of an ancient dream, the beginning of the longlesson we would teach ourselves that however complicated wewere, however faulty and difficult to describe in even our simplest actions and modes of being, we could be imitated andbettered. And I was there as a young man, an early and eageradopter in that chilly dawn.

But artificial humans were a cliche long before theyarrived, so when they did, they seemed to some a disappoint ment. The imagination, fleeter than history, than technological advance, had already rehearsed this future in books, thenfilms and TV dramas, as if human actors, walking with a certain glazed look, phony head movements, some stiffness in thelower back, could prepare us for life with our cousins from thefuture.

I was among the optimists, blessed by unexpected fundsfollowing my mother's death and the sale of the family home,which turned out to be on a valuable development site. Thefirst truly viable manufactured human with plausible intelligence and looks, believable motion and shifts of expression,went on sale the week before the Falklands Task Force set offon its hopeless mission. Adam cost PS86,000. I brought himhome in a hired van to my unpleasant flat in north Clapham.I'd made a reckless decision, but I was encouraged by reportsthat Sir Alan Turing, war hero and presiding genius of thedigital age, had taken delivery of the same model. Fie probablywanted to have his lab take it apart to examine its workingsfully.

Twelve of this first edition were called Adam, thirteenwere called Eve. Corny, everyone agreed, but commercial.Notions of biological race being scientifically discredited,the twenty-five were designed to cover a range of ethnicities.There were rumours, then complaints, that the Arab could notbe told apart from the Jew. Random programming as well aslife experience would grant to all complete latitude in sexualpreference. By the end of the first week, all the Eves sold out.At a careless glance, I might have taken my Adam for a Turkor a Greek. He weighed 170 pounds, so I had to ask my upstairsneighbour, Miranda, to help me carry him in from the streeton the disposable stretcher that came with the purchase.While his batteries began to charge, I made us coffee,then scrolled through the 470-page online handbook. Its language was mostly clear and precise. But Adam was createdacross different agencies and in places the instructions had thecharm of a nonsense poem. "Unreveal upside of B347k vest togain carefree emoticon with motherboard output to attenuatemood-swing penumbra."

At last, with cardboard and polystyrene wrapping strewnaround his ankles, he sat naked at my tiny dining table, eyesclosed, a black power line trailing from the entry point inhis umbilicus to a thirteen-amp socket in the wall. It wouldtake sixteen hours to fire him up. Then sessions of downloadupdates and personal preferences. I wanted him now, and sodid Miranda. Like eager young parents, we were avid for hisfirst words. There was no loudspeaker cheaply buried in hischest. We knew from the excited publicity that he formedsounds with breath, tongue, teeth and palate. Already his lifelike skin was warm to the touch and as smooth as a child's.Miranda claimed to see his eyelashes flicker. I was certain shewas seeing vibrations from the Tube trains rolling a hundredfeet below us, but I said nothing.

Adam was not a sex toy. However, he was capable of sexand possessed functional mucous membranes, in the maintenance of which he consumed half a litre of water each day.While he sat at the table, I observed that he was uncircumcised, fairly well endowed, with copious dark pubic hair. Thishighly advanced model of artificial human was likely toreflect the appetites of its young creators of code. The Adamsand Eves, it was thought, would be lively.

He was advertised as a companion, an intellectual sparring partner, friend and factotum who could wash dishes,make beds and "think." Every moment of his existence, everything he heard and saw, he recorded and could retrieve. Hecouldn't drive as yet and was not allowed to swim or shower orgo out in the rain without an umbrella, or operate a chainsawunsupervised. As for range, thanks to breakthroughs in electrical storage, he could run seventeen kilometres in two hourswithout a charge or, its energy equivalent, converse non-stopfor twelve days. He had a working life of twenty years. Hewas compactly built, square-shouldered, dark-skinned, withthick black hair swept back; narrow in the face, with a hint ofhooked nose suggestive of fierce intelligence, pensively hoodedeyes, tight lips that, even as we watched, were draining of theirdeathly yellowish-white tint and acquiring rich human colour,perhaps even relaxing a little at the corners. Miranda said heresembled "a docker from the Bosphorus."

Before us sat the ultimate plaything, the dream of ages,the triumph of humanism--or its angel of death. Excitingbeyond measure, but frustrating too. Sixteen hours was a longtime to be waiting and watching. I thought that for the sumI'd handed over after lunch, Adam should have been chargedup and ready to go. It was a wintry late afternoon. I madetoast and we drank more coffee. Miranda, a doctoral scholar ofsocial history, said she wished the teenage Mary Shelleyhere beside us, observing closely, not a monster like Frankenstein's, but this handsome dark-skinned younglife. I said that what both creatures shared was a hunger forthe animating force of electricity.

"We share it too." She spoke as though she was referringonly to herself and me, rather than all of electrochemicallycharged humanity.

She was twenty-two, mature for her years and ten yearsyounger than me. From a long perspective, there was notmuch between us. We were gloriously young. But I consideredmyself at a different stage of life. My formal education was farbehind me. I'd suffered a series of professional and financialand personal failures. I regarded myself as too hard-bitten, toocynical for a lovely young woman like Miranda. And thoughshe was beautiful, with pale brown hair and a long thin face,and eyes that often appeared narrowed by suppressed mirth,and though in certain moods I looked at her in wonder, I'ddecided early on to confine her in the role of kind, neighbourlyfriend. We shared an entrance hall and her tiny apartmentwas right over mine. We saw each other for a coffee now andthen to talk about relationships and politics and all the rest.With pitch-perfect neutrality she gave the impression of beingat ease with the possibilities. To her, it seemed, an afternoonof intimate pleasure with me would have weighed equallywith a chaste and companionable chat. She was relaxed in mycompany and I preferred to think that sex would ruin everything. We remained good chums. But there was somethingalluringly secretive or restrained about her. Perhaps, withoutknowing it, I had been in love with her for months. Withoutknowing it? What a flimsy formulation that was!

Reluctantly, we agreed to turn our backs on Adam and oneach other for a while. Miranda had a seminar to attend northof the river, I had emails to write. By the early seventies, digital communication had discarded its air of convenience andbecome a daily chore. Likewise the 250 mph trains--crowdedand dirty. Speech-recognition software, a fifties miracle, hadlong turned to drudge, with entire populations sacrificinghours each day to lonely soliloquising. Brain--machine interfacing, wild fruit of sixties optimism, could barely arouse theinterest of a child. What people queued the entire weekend forbecame, six months later, as interesting as the socks on theirfeet. What happened to the cognition-enhancing helmets, thespeaking fridges with a sense of smell? Gone the way of themouse pad, the Filofax, the electric carving knife, the fondueset. The future kept arriving. Our bright new toys began torust before we could get them home, and life went on muchas before.

Would Adam become a bore? It's not easy, to dictate whiletrying to ward off a bout of buyer's remorse. Surely other people, other minds, must continue to fascinate us. As artificialpeople became more like us, then became us, then becamemore than us, we could never tire of them. They were boundto surprise us. They might fail us in ways that were beyondour imagining. Tragedy was a possibility, but not boredom.What was tedious was the prospect of the user's guide.Instructions. My prejudice was that any machine that couldnot tell you by its very functioning how it should be used wasnot worth its keep. On an old-fashioned impulse, I was printing out the manual, then looking for a folder. All the while, Icontinued to dictate emails.

I couldn't think of myself as Adam's "user." I'd assumedthere was nothing to learn about him that he could not teachme himself. But the manual in my hands had fallen open atChapter Fourteen. Here the English was plain: preferences; personality parameters. Then a set of headings--Agreeableness.Extraversion. Openness to experience. Conscientiousness.Emotional stability. The list was familiar to me. The Five Fac tor model. Educated as I was in the humanities, I was suspicious of such reductive categories, though I knew from a friendin psychology that each item had many subgroups. Glancingat the next page I saw that I was supposed to select varioussettings on a scale of one to ten.

I'd been expecting a friend. I was ready to treat Adam asa guest in my home, as an unknown I would come to know.I'd thought he would arrive optimally adjusted. Factorysettings--a contemporary synonym for fate. My friends, family and acquaintances all had appeared in my life with fixedsettings, with unalterable histories of genes and environment.I wanted my expensive new friend to do the same. Why leaveit to me? But of course I knew the answer. Not many of usare optimally adjusted. Gentle Jesus? Humble Darwin? Oneevery 1,800 years. Even if it knew the best, the least harmful parameters of personality, which it couldn't, a worldwidecorporation with a precious reputation couldn't risk a mishap.Caveat emptor.

God had once delivered a fully formed companion for thebenefit of the original Adam. I had to devise one for myself.Here was Extraversion and a graded set of childish statements.He loves to be the life and soul of the party and He knows howto entertain people and lead them. And at the bottom, He feelsuncomfortable around other people and He prefers his owncompany. Here in the middle was, He likes a good party buthe's always happy to come home. This was me. But should Ibe replicating myself? If I was to choose from the middle ofeach scale I might devise the soul of blandness. Extraversionappeared to include its antonym. There was a long adjectival list with boxes to tick: outgoing, shy, excitable, talkative,withdrawn, boastful, modest, bold, energetic, moody. I wantednone of them, not for him, not for myself.

Apart from my moments of crazed decisions, I passed mostof my life, especially when alone, in a state of mood neutrality,with my personality, whatever that was, in suspension. Notbold, not withdrawn. Simply here, neither content nor morose,but carrying out tasks, thinking about dinner or sex, staringat the screen, taking a shower. Intermittent regrets about thepast, occasional forebodings about the future, barely aware ofthe present, except in the obvious sensory realm. Psychology,once so interested in the trillion ways the mind goes awry, wasnow drawn to what it considered the common emotions, fromgrief to joy. But it had overlooked a vast domain of everydayexistence: absent illness, famine, war or other stresses, a lot oflife is lived in the neutral zone, a familiar garden, but a greyone, unremarkable, immediately forgotten, hard to describe.At the time, I was not to know that these graded optiwould have little effect on Adam. The real determinantwhat was known as "machine learning." The user's handbookmerely granted an illusion of influence and control, the kindof illusion parents have in relation to their children's palities. It was a way of binding me to my purchase and providing legal protection for the manufacturer. "Take your time,"ersonthe manual advised. "Choose carefully. Allow yourself severalweeks, if necessary."

I let half an hour pass before I checked on him again. Nochange. Still at the table, arms pushed out straight before him,eyes closed. But I thought his hair, deepest black, was bulkedout a little and had acquired a certain shine, as though he'djust had a shower. Stepping closer, I saw to my delight thatthough he wasn't breathing, there was, by his left breast, a reg ular pulse, steady and calm, about one a second by my inexperienced guess. How reassuring. He had no blood to pumparound, but this simulation had an effect. My doubts faded justa little. I felt protective towards Adam, even as I knew howabsurd it was. I stretched out my hand and laid it over hisheart and felt against my palm its calm, iambic tread. I sensedI was violating his private space. These vital signs were easy tobelieve in. The warmth of his skin, the firmness and yield ofthe muscle below it--my reason said plastic or some such, butmy touch responded to flesh.

It was eerie, to be standing by this naked man, strugglingbetween what I knew and what I felt. I walked behind him,partly to be out of range of eyes that could open at any momentand find me looming over him. He was muscular around hisneck and spine. Dark hair grew along the line of his shoulders.His buttocks displayed muscular concavities. Below them, anted once more that I'd been too late for an Eve.

athlete's knotted calves. I hadn't wanted a superman. I regretOn my way out of the room I paused to look back andexperienced one of those moments that can derange the emotional life: a startling realisation of the obvious, an absurd leapof understanding into what one already knows. I stood withone hand resting on the doorknob. It must have been Adam'snakedness and physical presence that prompted the insight,but 1 wasn't looking at him. It was the butter dish. Also, twoplates and cups, two knives and two spoons scattered acrossthe table. The remains of my long afternoon with Miranda.Two wooden chairs were pushed back from the table, turnedcompanionably towards each other.

We had become closer this past month. We talked easily.I saw how precious she was to me and how carelessly I couldlose her. I should have said something by now. I'd taken herfor granted. Some unfortunate event, some person, a fellowstudent, could get between us. Her face, her voice, her manner,both reticent and clear-headed, were sharply present. The feelof her hand in mine, that lost, preoccupied manner she had.Yes, we had become very close and I'd failed to notice it washappening. I was an idiot. I had to tell her.

I went back into my office, which doubled as my bedroom.Between the desk and the bed there was enough space in whichto walk up and down. That she knew nothing about my feelings was now an anxious matter. Describing them would beembarrassing, perilous. She was a neighbour, a friend, a kindof sister. 1 would be addressing a person I didn't yet know. Shewould be obliged to step out from behind a screen, or removea mask and speak to me in terms I had never heard from her.I m so sorry... I like you very much but, you see ... Or she'd behorrified. Or, just possibly, overjoyed to hear the one thing shehad longed for, or to say herself but dreaded rejection.By chance, we were currently both free. She must havethought about it, about us. It was not an impossible fantasy. Iwould have to tell her face to face. Unbearable. Unavoidable.And so it went on, in tightening cycles. Restless, I went backnext door. I saw no change in Adam as I brushed past to getto the fridge, where there was a half-full bottle of white Bordeaux. I sat facing him and raised my glass. To love. This time,I felt less tenderness. I saw Adam for what it was, an inanimateconfection whose heartbeat was a regular electrical discharge,whose skin warmth was mere chemistry. When activated,some kind of microscopic balance-wheel device would priseopen his eyes. He would seem to see me, but he would be blind.Not even blind. When it kicked in, another system would givea semblance of breath, but not of life. A man newly in loveknows what life is.

With the inheritance, I could have bought a place somewhere north of the river, Notting Hill, or Chelsea. She mighteven have joined me. She would've had space for all the booksthat were boxed up in her father's garage in Salisbury. I saw afuture without Adam, the future that was mine until yesterday: an urban garden, high ceilings with plaster mouldings,stainless-steel kitchen, old friends to dinner. Books everywhere. What to do? I could take him, or it, back, or sell it onlineand take a small loss. I gave it a hostile look. The hands werepalms down on the table, the hawkish face remained angledtowards the hands. My foolish infatuation with technology!Another fondue set. Best to get away from the table before Iimpoverished myself with a single swipe of my father's oldclaw hammer.

I drank no more than half a glass, then I returned to thebedroom to distract myself with the Asian currency markets.All the while I listened out for footsteps in the flat above me.Late into the evening, I watched TV to catch up on the TaskForce that would soon set off across 8,000 miles of ocean torecapture what we then called the Falkland Islands.

At thirty-two, I was completely broke. Wasting mymother's inheritance on a gimmick was only one part of myproblem--but typical of it. Whenever money came my way,I caused it to disappear, made a magic bonfire of it, stuffedit into a top hat and pulled out a turkey. Often, though notin this recent case, my intention was to conjure a far largersum with minimal effort. I was a mug for schemes, semilegal ruses, cunning shortcuts. I was for grand and brilliantgestures. Others made them and flourished. They borrowedmoney, put it to interesting use and remained enriched even asthey settled their debts. Or they had jobs, professions, as I oncehad, and enriched themselves more modestly, at a steady rate.I meanwhile leveraged or, rather, shorted myself into genteelruin, into two damp ground-floor rooms in the dull no-man'sland of Edwardian terraced streets between Stockwell andClapham, south London.

I grew up in a village near Stratford, Warwickshire, theonly child of a musician father and community-nurse mother.Compared to Miranda's, my childhood was culturally undernourished. 1 here was no time or space for books, or even music.I took a precocious interest in electronics but ended up with ananthropology degree from an unregarded college in the southMidlands; I did a conversion course to law and, once quali fied, specialised in tax. A week after my twenty-ninth birthday I was struck off, and came close to a short spell in prison.My hundred hours of community service convinced me that 1should never have a regular job again. I made some money outof a book I wrote at high speed on artificial intelligence: lostto a life-extension-pill scheme. I made a reasonable sum on aproperty deal: lost to a car-rental scheme. I was left some fundsby a favourite uncle who had prospered by way of a heat-pumppatent: lost to a medical-insurance scheme.

At thirty-two, I was surviving by playing the stock andcurrency markets online. A scheme, just like the rest. Forseven hours a day I bowed before my keyboard, buying, selling, hesitating, punching the air one moment, cursing thenext, at least at the beginning. I read market reports, but Ibelieved I was dealing in a random system and mostly reliedon guesses. Sometimes I leaped ahead, sometimes I plunged,but on average through the year I made about as much as thepostman. I paid my rent, which was low in those days, ate anddressed well enough and thought I was beginning to stabilise,learning to know myself. I was determined that my thirtieswould be a superior performance to my twenties.

But my parents' pleasant family home was sold just as thefirst convincing artificial person came on the market. 1982.Robots, androids, replicates were my passion, even more soafter my research for the book. Prices were bound to fall, butI had to have one straight away, an Eve by preference, but anAdam would do.

It could have turned out differently. My previous girlfriend, Claire, was a sensible person who trained to be a dentalnurse. She worked in a Harley Street practice and she wouldhave talked me out of Adam. She was a woman of the world,of this one. She knew how to arrange a life. And not only herown. But I offended her with an act of undeniable disloyalty.She disowned me in a scene of regal fury, at the end of whichshe threw my clothes out into the street. Lime Grove. Shenever spoke to me again and belonged at the top of my list oferrors and failures. She could have saved me from myself.But. In the interests of balance, let that unsaved self speakup. I didn't buy Adam to make money. On the contrary. Mymotives were pure. I handed over a fortune in the name ofcuriosity, that steadfast engine of science, of intellectual life,of life itself. 1 his was no passing fad. There was a history, anaccount, a time-deposit, and I had a right to draw on it. Elec tronics and anthropology--distant cousins whom late modernity has drawn together and bound in marriage. The child ofthat coupling was Adam.

So, I appear before you, witness for the defence, afterschool, 5 p.m., typical specimen for my time--short trousers,scabby knees, freckles, short back and sides, eleven years old.1 m first in line, waiting for the lab to open and for "WiringClub to begin. Presiding is Mr. Cox, a gentle giant with carroty hair who teaches physics. My project is to build a radio.Its an act of faith, an extended prayer that has taken manyweeks. I have a base of hardboard, six inches by nine, easilydrilled. Colours are everything. Blue, red, yellow and whitewires run their modest courses around the board, turning atright angles, disappearing below to emerge elsewhere and beinterrupted by bright nodules, tiny vividly striped cylinders--capacitors, resistors--then an induction coil I have woundmyself, then an op-amp. I understand nothing. I follow a wiring diagram as a novice might murmur scripture. Mr. Coxgives softly spoken advice. I clumsily solder one piece, one wireor component, to another. The smoke and smell of solder is adrug I inhale deeply. 1 include in my circuit a toggle switchmade of Bakelite which, I've persuaded myself, came out ofa fighter plane, a Spitfire surely. The final connection, threemonths after my beginning, is from this piece of dark brownplastic to a nine-volt battery.

It's a cold, windy dusk in March. Other boys are hunchedover their projects. We are twelve miles away from Shake speare's hometown, in what will come to be known as a "bogstandard" comprehensive school. An excellent place, in fact.The fluorescent ceiling lights come on. Mr. Cox is on the farside of the lab with his back turned. I don't want to attract hisattention in case of failure. I throw the switch and--miracle--hear the sound of static. 1 jiggle the variable-tuning capacitor:music, terrible music, as I think, because violins are involved.Then comes the rapid voice of a woman, not speaking English.No one looks up, no one is interested. Building a radio isnothing special. But I'm speechless, close to tears. No technology since will amaze me as much. Electricity, passing throughpieces of metal carefully arranged by me, snatches from theair the voice of a foreign lady sitting somewhere far away. Hervoice sounds kindly. She isn't aware of me. I'll never learn hername or understand her language, and never meet her, notknowingly. My radio, with its irregular blobs of solder on aing from matter.

board, appears no less a wonder than consciousness itself arisBrains and electronics were closely related, so I discoveredthrough my teens as I built simple computers and programmedthem myself. Then complicated computers. Electricity and bitsof metal could add up numbers, make words, pictures, songs,remember things and even turn speech into writing.

When I was seventeen, Peter Cox persuaded me to studyphysics at a local college. Within a month I was bored andlooking to change. The subject was too abstract, the maths wasbeyond me. And by then I'd read a book or two and was takingan interest in imaginary people. Heller's Catch-18, Fitzgerald'sThe High-Bouncing Lover, Orwell's The Last Man in Europe,lolstoy's All's Well That Ends Well--I didn't get much fur ther and yet I saw the point of art. It was a form of investigation. But I didn't want to study literature--too intimidating,too intuitive. A single-sheet course summary I picked up inthe college library announced anthropology as "the science ofpeople in their societies through space and time." Systematicstudy, with the human factor thrown in. I signed up.

1 he first thing to learn: my course was pitifully underfunded. No bunking off for a year to the Trobriand Islands,where, I read, it was taboo to eat in front of others. It was goodmanners to eat alone, with your back turned to friends andfamily. J he islanders had spells to make ugly people beautiful. Children were actively encouraged to be sexual with eachother. Yams were the viable currency. Women determined thestatus of men. How strange and bracing. My view of humannature had been shaped by the mostly white populationcrammed into the southern quarter of England. Now I was setfree into bottomless relativism.

At the age of nineteen I wrote a wise essay on honourcultures entitled "Mind-forged Manacles?" Dispassionately, Igathered up my case studies. What did I know or care? Therewere places where rape was so common it didn't have a name.A young father's throat was cut for failing in his duties to anancient feud. Here was a family eager to kill a daughter forbeing seen holding hands with a lad from the wrong religiousgroup. There, elderly women keenly assisted in the genitalmutilation of their granddaughters. What of the instinctiveparental impulses to love and protect? The cultural signal waslouder. What of universal values? Upended. Nothing like thisin Stratford-upon-Avon. It was all about the mind, the tradition, the religion--nothing but software, I now thought, andbest regarded in value-free terms.

Anthropologists did not pass judgement. They observedand reported on human variety. They celebrated difference.What was wicked in Warwickshire was unremarkable inPapua New Guinea. Locally, who was to say what was good orbad? Certainly not a colonial power. I derived from my studiessome unfortunate conclusions about ethics which led me a fewyears later to the dock in a county court, accused of conspiringwith others to mislead the tax authorities on a grand scale.1 did not attempt to persuade His Honour that far from hiscourt might be a coconut beach where such conspiracy wasrespected. Instead, I came to my senses just before I addressedthe judge. Morals were real, they were true, good and badinhered in the nature of things. Our actions must be judged ontheir terms. This was what I'd assumed before anthropologycame along. In quavering, hesitant tones I apologised abjectlyto the court and dodged a custodial sentence.

When I entered the kitchen in the morning, later thanusual, Adam's eyes were open. They were pale blue, fleckedwith minuscule vertical rods of black. The eyelashes werelong and thick, like a child's. But his blink mechanism hadnot yet kicked in. It was set at irregular intervals and adjustedfor mood and gestures, and primed to react to the actions andspeech of others. Reluctantly, I'd read the handbook into thenight. He was equipped with a blink reflex to protect his eyesfrom flying objects. At present, his gaze was empty of meaning or intent and therefore unaffecting, as lifeless as the stareof a shop-window mannequin. So far, he was showing noneof the fractional movements that warmly typify the humanhead. Elsewhere, no body language at all. When I felt for thepulse in his wrist, I found nothing--a heartbeat without apulse. His arm was heavy to lift, resistant at the elbow joint,as though rigor mortis was about to set in.

1 turned my back on him and made coffee. Miranday mind. Everything had changed. Nothing had changed.

During my near-sleepless night, I'd remembered that shevisiting her father. She would have gone straight to Salisburyfrom her seminar. I saw her on her train from Waterloo, sitting with an unread book on her lap, staring at the rushinglandscape, the dip and rise of telephone lines, not thinking ofme. Or thinking only of me. Or recalling a boy at her seminarwho'd tried to out-stare her.

I watched the TV news on my phone. A brilliant mosaic insound and sparkling seaside light. Portsmouth. The Task Forceready to depart. Most of the country was in a dream-theatre,in historical dress. Late medieval. Seventeenth century. Earlynineteenth. Ruffs, hose, hooped skirts, powdered wigs, eyepatch, wooden legs. Accuracy was unpatriotic. Historically, wewere special and the fleet was bound for success. TV and pressencouraged a vague collective memory of enemies defeated--the Spanish, the Dutch, the Germans twice this century, theFrench from Agincourt to Waterloo. A fly-past by fighter jets.A young man in combat gear, fresh out of Sandhurst, narrowedhis eyes as he told an interviewer of the difficulties ahead. Asuperior officer spoke of his men's unshakeable resolve. I wasmoved, even as I disliked it. When a massed band of Highlandpipers marched towards their ship's gangplank, my spiritsswelled. Then back to the studio for charts, arrows, logistics,objectives, sane voices in agreement. For diplomatic moves. Foring Street.

the prime minister in her trim blue suit on the steps of DownI warmed to it, even though I often declared myself againstit all. I loved my country. What a venture, what wild courage. Eight thousand miles. What decent people putting theirlives at risk. I took a second coffee next door, made the bed togive the room the appearance of a workplace, and sat down toreflect a while on the state of the world's markets. The prospect of war had sent the FTSE down a further one per cent.Still in patriotic mood, I assumed an Argie defeat and took aposition on a toy and novelty group that made Union Jacks onsticks for people to wave. I also invested in two champagneimporters, and bet on a big recovery generally. Merchant-navyships had been requisitioned to transport troops to the SouthAtlantic. A friend who worked in asset management in theCity told me that his company was predicting that some wouldbe sunk. It made sense to short the major players in the insurance markets and invest in South Korean shipbuilders. I wasin no mood for such cynicism.

My desktop computer, bought second-hand from a Brixtonjunk shop, dated from the mid-sixties and was slow. It tookme an hour to arrange the position on the flag-maker. I wouldhave been quicker if I'd had my thoughts under control. When1 wasn't thinking about Miranda and listening out for herfootsteps in the flat above me, I was thinking about Adam andwhether 1 should sell him off or start making decisions abouthis personality. I sold sterling and thought more about Adam.I bought gold and thought again about Miranda. I sat on thelavatory and wondered about Swiss francs. Over a third coffeeI asked myself what else a victorious nation might spend itsmoney on. Beef. Pubs. 1 V sets. I took positions on all threeand felt virtuous, a part of the war effort. Soon it was time forlunch.

I sat facing Adam again while I ate a cheese and picklesandwich. Any further signs of life? Not at first glance. His gaze,directed over my left shoulder, was still dead. No movement.But five minutes later I glanced up by chance and was actuallylooking at him when he began to breathe. I heard first a seriesof rapid clicks, then a mosquito-like whine as his lips parted.For half a minute nothing happened, then his chin trembledand he made an authentic gulping sound as he snatched hisfirst mouthful of air. He didn't need oxygen, of course. Thatmetabolic necessity was years away. His first exhalation wasso long in coming that I stopped eating and tensely waited. Itcame at last--silently, through his nostrils. Soon his breathingassumed a steady rhythm, his chest expanded and contractedappropriately. I was spooked. With his lifeless eyes, Adam hadthe appearance of a breathing corpse.

How much of life we ascribe to the eyes. If only his wereclosed, I thought, he'd at least have the appearance of a manin a trance. I left my sandwich and went to stand by him and,out of curiosity, put my hand close to his mouth. His breathwas moist and warm. Clever. In the user's manual I'd read thathe urinated once a day in the late morning. Also clever. As Iwent to close his right eye, my forefinger brushed against hiseyebrow. He flinched and violently jerked his head away fromme. Startled, I moved back. Then I waited. For twenty secondsor more nothing happened, then, with a smooth, soundlessmovement, infinitesimally slow, the tilt of his shoulders, theangle of his head moved towards their former positions. Hisrate of breathing was undisturbed. Mine and my pulse hadaccelerated. I was standing several feet away, fascinated by theway he settled back, like a balloon gently deflating. I decidedagainst closing his eyes. While I was waiting for somethingmore from him, I heard Miranda moving around in the flatupstairs. Back from Salisbury. Wandering in and out of herbedroom. Once again I felt the troubled thrill of undeclaredlove, and that was when I had the first stirrings of an idea.That afternoon I should have been making and losing money at my computer. Instead, I watched from thegreat height of a helicopter as the leading ships of the TaskForce rounded Portland Bill and filed by Chesil Beach. Thevery place names deserved a respectful salute. How brilliant.Onwards! I kept thinking. And then, Go back! Soon the fleetcame along the Jurassic coast, where herds of dinosaurs oncegrazed on giant ferns. Suddenly we were down among thepeople of Lyme Regis gathering on the Cobb. Some had binoculars, many had the very flags I had in mind, plastic on awooden stick. A news team might have handed them around.Vox pops. Gentle local voices of hard-working women, tightwith emotion. Tough old coves who'd fought in Crete andNormandy, nodding to themselves, giving nothing away. Oh,how I wished I too believed. But I could! A long lens mountedsomewhere on the Lizard showed the tiny receding blobs ofships heading bravely out onto the big swell of the open sea tothe sound of husky Rod Stewart, while I tried not to be tearful.W hat turmoil on a weekday afternoon. A new kind ofbeing at my dining table, the woman I newly loved six feetabove my head, and the country at old-fashioned war. But Iwas tolerably disciplined and had promised myself seven hoursevery day. I turned off the I V and went to my screen. Waitingfor me was the email from Miranda that I'd hoped for.

I knew I would never get rich. The sums I moved around,safely spread across scores of opportunities, were small. Overthe month I had done well out of solid-state batteries but hadlost almost as much to rare earth element futures--a foolish leap into the known. But I was keeping myself out of acareer, an office job. This was my least bad option in the pursuit of freedom. I worked on through the afternoon, resistingthe temptation to look in on Adam, even though I guessed hewould be fully charged by now. Next step was downloadinghis updates. Then those problematic personal preferences.Before lunch I'd sent Miranda an email inviting her todinner that night. Now she'd accepted. She liked my cooking. During the meal I would make a proposal. I would fillin roughly half the choices for Adam's personality, then giveher the link and the password and let her choose the rest. 1wouldn't interfere, I wouldn't even want to know what decisions she had made. She might be influenced by a version ofherself: delightful. She might conjure the man of her dreams:instructive. Adam would come into our lives like a real person, with the layered intricacies of his personality revealedonly through time, through events, through his dealings withwhomever he met. In a sense he would be like our child. Whatwe were separately would be merged in him. Miranda wouldbe drawn into the adventure. We would be partners, andAdam would be our joint concern, our creation. We would be afamily. There was nothing underhand in my plan. I was sureto see more of her. We'd have fun.

My schemes generally fell apart. This was different. I wasclear-headed, incapable of deceiving myself. Adam was not mylove-rival. However he fascinated her, she was also physicallyrepelled by him. She had told me as much. It was "creepy," shehad told me the day before, that his body was warm. She saidit was "a bit weird" that he could make words with his tongue.But he had a word-store as large as Shakespeare's. It was hismind that aroused her curiosity.

So the decision not to sell Adam was made. I was to sharehim with Miranda--just as I might have shared a house. Hewould contain us. Making progress, comparing notes, pooling disappointments. I regarded myself at thirty-two as anold hand at love. Earnest declarations would drive her away.Far better to make this journey together. Already she was myfriend, she sometimes held my hand. I wasn't starting fromnowhere. Deeper feelings could steal up on her, as they had onme. If they didn't, then at least I'd have the consolation of moretime with her.

In my ancient fridge, whose rusty door handle had partlycome away, was a corn-fed chicken, a quarter-pound of butter,two lemons and a bunch of fresh tarragon. In a bowl on theside were a few bulbs of garlic. In a cupboard, some earthcaked potatoes, already sprouting--but peeled, they wouldroast nicely. Lettuce, a dressing, a hearty bottle of Cahors.Simple. I irst, heat the oven. These ordinary matters filled mythoughts as I stood from my desk. An old friend of mine, ajournalist, once said that paradise on earth was to work all dayalone in anticipation of an evening in interesting company.I he meal I intended to cook for her and the homely dictum of my friend distracted me and for the moment Adamwas not on my mind. So it was a shock to enter the kitchenand find him standing there, naked, by the table, partly facingaway from me, one hand vaguely fiddling with the wire thatprotruded from his umbilicus. His other hand was somewherenear his chin, stroking it in a contemplative way--a cleveralgorithm no doubt, but entirely convincing in its projectionof a thoughtful self.

I recovered and said, "Adam?"

He turned towards me slowly. When he was facing mefull on, he met my gaze and blinked, and blinked again. Themechanism was working but seemed too deliberate.

He said, "Charlie, I'm pleased to meet you at last. Couldyou bear to arrange my downloads and prepare the variousparameters . . ."

He paused, looking at me intently, his black flecked eyesscanning my face in quick saccades. Taking me in. "You'll findall you need to know in the manual."

"I'll do that," I said. "In my own time."

His voice surprised and pleased me. It was a light tenor,at a decent speed, with a kindly variation in tone, both obliging and friendly, but no hint of subservience. The accent wasthe standard English of an educated man from the middleclass south, with the faintest hint of West Country vowels. Myheart was beating fast, but I was intent on seeming calm. Toshow that I was, I made myself take a step closer. We stared ateach other in silence.

Years before, as a student, I read of a "first contact" inthe early 1950s between an explorer called Leahy and somehighlanders of Papua New Guinea. The tribesmen could nottell whether the pale figures who had suddenly appeared ontheir land were humans or spirits. They returned to their village to discuss the matter, leaving a teenage boy behind to spyfrom a distance. The question was settled when he reportedback that one of Leahy's colleagues had gone behind a bushto defecate. Here, in my kitchen in 1982, not many years later,things were not so simple. The manual informed me thatAdam had an operating system as well as a nature--that is, ahuman nature--and a personality, the one I hoped Mirandawould help provide. I was unsure how these three substratesoverlapped or reacted with each other. When I studied anthropology, a universal human nature was thought not to exist. Itwas a romantic illusion, merely the variable product of localconditions. Only anthropologists, who studied other cultures indepth, who knew the beautiful extent of human variety, fullygrasped the absurdity of human universals. People who stayedbehind at home in comfort understood nothing, not even of theirown cultures. One of my teachers liked to quote Kipling--"Andwhat should they know of England who only England know?"By the time I was in my mid-twenties, evolutionary psychology was beginning to reassert the idea of an essentialnature, derived from a common genetic inheritance, independent of time and place. The response from the mainstreamof social studies was dismissive, sometimes furious. To speakof genes in relation to people's behaviour evoked memories ofHitlers 1 hird Reich, fashions change. But Adam's makerswere riding the new wave of evolutionary thinking.

He stood before me, perfectly still in the gloom of the winter s afternoon. I he debris of the packaging that had protectedhim was still piled around his feet. He emerged from it likeBotticelli's Venus rising from her shell. Through the northfacing window, the diminishing light picked out the outlinesof just one half of his form, one side of his noble face. The onlysounds were the friendly murmur of the fridge and a muteddrone of traffic. I had a sense then of his loneliness, settlinglike a weight around his muscular shoulders. He had wokento find himself in a dingy kitchen, in London SW9 in the latetwentieth century, without friends, without a past or any senseof his future. He truly was alone. All the other Adams andEves were spread about the world with their owners, thoughseven Eves were said to be concentrated in Riyadh.

As I reached for the light switch I said, "How are youfeeling?"

He looked away to consider his reply. "I don't feel right."This time his tone was flat. It seemed my question hadlowered his spirits. But within such microprocessors, whatspirits?

"What's wrong?"

"I don't have any clothes. And--""I'll get you some. What else?"

"This wire. If I pull it out it will hurt."

"I'll do it and it won't hurt."

But I didn't move immediately. In full electric light I wasable to observe his expression, which barely shifted when hespoke. It was not an artificial face I saw, but the mask of a pokerplayer. Without the lifeblood of a personality, he had little toexpress. He was running on some form of default programthat would serve him until the downloads were complete. Hehad movements, phrases, routines that gave him a veneer ofplausibility. Minimally, he knew what to do, but little else.Like a man with a shocking hangover.

I could admit it to myself now--I was fearful of him andreluctant to go closer. Also, I was absorbing the implications ofhis last word. Adam only had to behave as though he felt painand I would be obliged to believe him, respond to him as if hedid. Too difficult not to. Too starkly pitched against the drift ofhuman sympathies. At the same time I couldn't believe he wascapable of being hurt, or of having feelings, or of any sentienceat all. And yet I had asked him how he felt. His reply had beenappropriate, and so too my offer to bring him clothes. And Ibelieved none of it. I was playing a computer game. But a realgame, as real as social life, the proof of which was my heart'srefusal to settle and the dryness in my mouth.

It was clear he would speak only when spoken to. Resisting the impulse to reassure him further, I went back into thebedroom and found him some clothes. He was a sturdy fellow, a couple of inches shorter than me, but I thought my stuffwould fit him well enough. Trainers, socks, underwear, jeansand sweater. I stood in front of him and put the bundle into hisyear-old knows how hard it is to put socks on.

hands. I wanted to watch him dress to see if his motor func tions were as good as the literature had promised. Any threeWhen I gave him my clothes I caught a faint scent fromhis upper torso and perhaps his legs too, of warmed oil, thepale, highly refined sort my father had used to lubricate thekeys of his sax. Adam held the clothes in the crook of botharms, with his hands extended towards me. He didn't flinchwhen I stooped and disengaged the power line. His tight, chis elled features showed nothing at all. A forklift truck approaching a pallet would have been as expressive. Then, I supposed,some logic gate or a network of them yielded and he whispered, "Thank you." These words were accompanied by anemphatic nod of the head. He sat down, rested the pile on thetable, then took from the top the sweater. After a reflectivepause he unfolded it, laid it flat, chest side down, threaded hisright hand and arm through to the shoulder, then the left, andwith a complicated muscular swaying shrug it was on himand he was tugging it down straight at the waist. The sweater,made of faded yellow fleece, bore in red letters the jokey slogan of a charity I once supported: "Dyslexics of the WorldUntie!" He unboxed the socks and remained seated to pullthem on. His movements were deft. No trace of hesitation, noproblems with relative spatial calculation. He stood, held theboxer shorts low, stepped into them, pulled them up, steppedlikewise into the jeans, zipped up the fly and secured the silverbutton at the waist in one continuous movement. He sat again,hooked his feet into the trainers and tied the laces in a doublebow at a blurring speed that to some might have seemed inhuman. But I didn't think it was. It was a triumph of engineeringand software design: a celebration of human ingenuity.I turned away from him to begin my preparations fordinner. Overhead, I heard Miranda cross the room, her stepsmuffled, as though barefoot. Preparing to take a shower, getting ready. For me. I pictured her still wet, in a dressing gown,opening her underwear drawer and wondering. Silk, yes.Peach? Fine. While the oven warmed, I set the ingredientsout on the work surface. After a day of greedy trading, there'snothing like cooking to bring one back into the world's betterside, its long history of catering to others. I looked over myshoulder. It was startling, the effect of the clothes. He sat there,elbows on the table like some old pal of mine, waiting for meto pour the first glass of the evening.

I called out to him, "I'm roasting a chicken with butterand tarragon." It was mischievous of me, knowing his plaindiet of electrons.

Without pausing, and in the flattest of tones, he said,I hey go well together. But it's easy to burn the leaves whenyou're browning the bird."

Browning the bird? It was correct, I guessed, but it soundedodd.

"What d'you advise?"

Cover the chicken with tinfoil. From the size of it I'd sayseventy minutes at 180. "I hen brush the leaves off into the juicewhile you brown at the same temperature for fifteen minuteswithout the foil. I hen pour the tarragon back on with thejuices and melted butter."

"Thanks."

Remember to let it stand under a cloth for ten minutesbefore you carve."

"I know about that."

"Sorry."

Did I sound tetchy? By the early eighties we were longused to talking to machines, in our cars and homes, to calltres and health clinics. But Adam had weighed up my chickenfrom across the room and apologised for the extraneous advice.cenI glanced back at him again. Now I noticed that he'd pulledup the sleeves of the sweater to his elbows to expose powerful wrists. He'd interlaced his fingers and was resting his chinon his hands. And this was him without a personality. Fromwhere I stood, with the light picking out his high cheekbones,he looked tough, the quiet guy at the bar you'd prefer not todisturb. Not the sort to hand out cooking tips.

I felt the need, rather childish, to demonstrate that I wasple of times? I want to see how you move."

"Sure."

in charge. I said, "Adam, will you walk round the table a cou There was nothing mechanical about his gait. In the confines of the room he managed a loping stride. When he'd beenround twice he stood by his chair, waiting.

"Now you could open the wine."

"Certainly."

He came towards me with his open palm extended and Iplaced the corkscrew on it. It was of the articulated, cantilevering kind favoured by sommeliers. It gave him no trouble.He raised the cork to his nose, then reached into a cupboardfor a glass, poured a half-inch and passed it to me. As I tastedit, his gaze on me was intent. The wine was hardly of the firstor even second rank, but it wasn't corked. I nodded and hefilled the glass and set it down carefully by the stove. Then hereturned to his chair as I turned away to prepare a salad.A peaceful half-hour went by and neither of us spoke.

I made a dressing for the salad and chopped the potatoes.Miranda was in my thoughts. I was convinced I'd reachedone of those momentous points in life where the path into thefuture forked. Down one route, life would continue as before,down the other, it would be transformed. Love, adventures,sheer excitement, but also order in my new maturity, no morewild schemes, a home together, children. Or these last twowere wild schemes. Hers was the sweetest nature, she waskind, beautiful, amusing, vastly intelligent. . .

At a sound behind me, I came back to myself, heard itagain and turned. Adam was still in his chair at the kitchenposefully clearing his throat.

table. He had made, then repeated, the sound of a man pur"Charlie, I understand that you're cooking for your friendupstairs. Miranda."

1 said nothing.

"According to my researches these past few seconds, and tomy analysis, you should be careful of trusting her completely.""What?"

"According to my--""Explain yourself."

I was staring angrily into Adam's blank face. He said itematic, malicious liar."

"Meaning?"

quiet sorrowful voice, "T here's a possibility she's a liar. A sysIt would take a moment, but she's coming down thestairs."

His hearing was better than mine. Within seconds therewas a gentle tap at the door.

"Would you like me to get it?"

I didn t answer him. I was in such a fury. I went into theminiature hallway in the wrong frame of mind. Who or whatwas this idiot machine? Why should I tolerate it?

I wrenched the door open, and there she was in a prettypale blue dress, smiling merrily at me, a posy of snowdrops inher hand, and she'd never looked so lovely.

Several weeks passed before Miranda was able to workon her share of Adam's character. Her father was illand she made frequent journeys to Salisbury to lookafter him. She had a paper to write on nineteenth-centuryCorn Law reform and its impact on a single street in a townin Herefordshire. The academic movement known generallyas "theory" had taken social history "by storm"--her phrase.Since she had studied at a traditional university which offeredold-fashioned narrative accounts of the past, she was havingto take on a new vocabulary, a new way of thinking. Sometimes as we lay side by side in bed (the evening of the tarragonchicken had been a success) I listened to her complaints andtried to look and sound sympathetic. It was no longer properto assume that anything at all had ever happened in the past.There were only historical documents to consider, and chang ing scholarly approaches to them, and our own shifting relationship to those approaches, all of which were determined byideological context, by relations to power and wealth, to race,class, gender and sexual orientation.

None of this seemed so unreasonable to me, or all thatinteresting. I didn't say so. I wanted to encourage Mirandain everything she did or thought. Love is generous. Besides,it suited me to think that whatever had once happened wasno more than its evidence. In the new dispensation, the pastweighed less. I was in the process of remaking myself andeager to forget my own recent history. My foolish choices werebehind me. I saw a future with Miranda. I was approachingthe shores of early middle age, and I was taking stock. I liveddaily with the accumulated historical evidence my past hadbequeathed, evidence I intended to obliterate: my loneliness,relative poverty, poor living quarters and diminished prospects. Where I stood in relation to the means of productionand the rest was a blank to me. Nowhere, I preferred to think.Was my purchase of Adam more proof of failure? I wasn'tsure. Waking in the small hours--next to Miranda, her placeor mine I summoned in the darkness a lever of the sort foundby old railway tracks that would shunt Adam back to the storeand return the money to my account. By daylight the matter was more diffuse or nuanced. I hadn't told Miranda thatAdam had spoken against her, and I hadn't told Adam thatMiranda was to have a hand in his personality--a punishment of sorts. I despised his warning about her, but his mindfascinated me--if a mind was what he had. Hishe was a technical miracle. He was expensive but this child ofthe Wiring Club could not let him go.

Working on the old computer in my bedroom, out ofAdam's sight, I typed in my own choices. I decided thating every other question would be a sufficiently random kindthuggishly handsome, he could put on his own socks andanswerof merging--our home-made genetic shuffling. Now I had amethod and a partner, I relaxed into the process, which beganto take on a vaguely erotic quality; we were making a child!Because Miranda was involved, I was protected from selfreplication. The genetic metaphor was helpful. Scanning thelists of idiotic statements, I more or less chose approximationsof myself. Whether Miranda did the same, or something different, we would end up with a third person, a new personality.I wasn't going to sell Adam, but the "malicious liar"remark rankled. In studying the manual, I'd read about thekill switch. Somewhere on the nape of his neck, just below thehairline, was a mole. If I were to lay a finger on it for threeseconds or so, then increase the pressure, he would be powered down. Nothing, no files, memories or skills, would be lost.That first afternoon with Adam I'd been reluctant to touch hisneck or any part of him, and held back until late in the dayafter my successful dinner with Miranda. I'd spent the afternoon at my screen losing PS111. I went into the kitchen wherethe dishes, pots and pans were piled in the sink. As a test ofhis competence I could have asked Adam to clear up, but I wasin a strange, elevated state that day. Everything to do withMiranda glowed, even her nightmare that had woken me inthe small hours. The plate I had put before her, the lucky forkthat had been in and out of her mouth, the pale bowed shapewhere her lips had kissed her wine glass were mine alone tohandle and cleanse. And so I began.

Behind me, Adam was in place at the table, gazing towardsthe window. I finished and was drying my hands on a tea towelas I went over to him. Despite my sunny mood, I could not forgive his disloyalty. I didn't want to hear what else he had tosay. There were boundaries of ordinary decency he needed tolearn--hardly a challenge for his neural networks. His heuristic shortcomings had encouraged my decision. When I hadlearned more, when Miranda had done her share, he couldcome back into our lives.

1 kept a friendly tone. "Adam, I'm switching you off for awhile."

His head turned towards me, paused, tilted, then tiltedthe other way. It was some designer's notion of how consciousness might manifest itself in movement. It would come toirritate me.

He said, "With all respect, I think that's a bad idea.""It's what I've decided."

"I've been enjoying my thoughts. I was thinking aboutreligion and the afterlife."

"Not now."

"It occurred to me that those who believe in a life beyondthis one will--"1 hat's enough. Hold still." I reached over his shoulder.His breath was warm on my arm, which, I supposed, he couldsnap with ease. 1 he manual quoted in bold Isaac Asimov'stirelessly reiterated First Law of Robotics, "A robot may notinjure a human being or, through inaction, allow a humanbeing to come to harm."

I couldnt find what I wanted by touch. I walked behindAdam and there, as described, right on the hairline was themole. I put my finger on it.

"Might we talk about this first?"

"No." I pressed and with the faintest whirring sigh heslumped. His eyes remained open. I fetched a blanket to coverhim up.

In the days that followed this powering-down, two questions preoccupied me: Would Miranda fall in love with me?And would French-made Exocet missiles scupper the Britishfleet when it came within range of Argentinian fighter jets?When I was falling asleep, or in the mornings while I lingereda few seconds in the foggy no-man's-land between dreamingand waking, the questions merged, the air-to-ship missilesbecame arrows of love.

What was disarming and curious about Miranda was theease that settled round her choices, the way she abandonedherself to the flow of events. That evening she came to supper, and after a pleasant two hours eating and drinking, wemade love, having closed the bedroom door on Adam. Thenwe talked into the night. Just as easily, she could have kissedme on the cheek after the chicken with tarragon and retreatedupstairs to her own bed and read a history book before falling asleep. What for me was momentous, the immediate,astonishing fulfilment of my hopes, was for her enjoyable andentirely unsurprising, a pleasant extra course after the coffee. Like chocolates. Or a good grappa. Neither my nakednessnor my tenderness had the effect on her that hers, in all theirglorious sweetness, had on me. And I was in decent shape--good muscle tone, full head of dark brown hair--and generous, resourceful, some had been kind enough to say. I played adecent hand in pillow talk. She hardly seemed to notice howwell we got along, how one topic, one harmless running joke,one mood tone succeeded another. My self-esteem allowedthat this was how it must have been with everyone she hadknown. I suspected that our first night together barely enteredher thoughts the following day.

I could hardly complain when the second night followedthe pattern of the first, except that she cooked for me and weslept in her bed, and on the third, in mine--and so on. For allour carefree physical intimacy, I never spoke about my feelings in case I prompted her to admit she had none of her own.I preferred to wait, to let things build, let her feel free untilshe realised that she wasn't, that she was in love with me andit was too late to turn back.

There was vanity in this expectation. After a week or sothere was anxiety. I'd been glad to switch Adam off. Now Iwondered about reactivating him to ask about his warning, hisreasons, his sources. But I couldn't let a machine have such ahold over me, which was what would happen if I granted it therole of confidant, counsellor, oracle, in my most private affairs.I had my pride and I believed that Miranda was incapable ofa malicious lie.

And yet. I despised myself for doing it, but ten days intothe affair I began my own investigations. Apart from themuch-discussed notion of "machine intuition," Adam's onlypossible source was the Internet. I trawled through the socialmedia sites. I here were no accounts under her name. She livedin the reflections of her friends. So there she was, at parties oron holidays, carrying a friend's daughter on her shoulders at azoo, gum-booted on a farm, linking arms or dancing or romping in the pool with a succession of bare-chested boyfriends,with boisterous crowds of teenage girlfriends, with drunkenundergraduates. All who knew her liked her. No one on anyaccessible site had a sinister story. Now and then the chatterendorsed parts of the past she was recounting in our midnightconversations. Elsewhere her name came up in connectionwith the one academic paper she had published--"Pannagein Swyncombe: the role of the half-wild pig in the householdeconomies of a medieval Chilterns village." When I read it, Iloved her more.

As for the intuitive artificial mind, it was pure urban legend, begun in early 1968 when Alan Turing and his brilliantyoung colleague Demis Hassabis devised software to beat oneof the world's great masters of the ancient game of go in fivestraight games. Everyone in the business knew that such a featcould not be accomplished by number-crunching force. Thepossible moves in go and chess vastly exceed the number ofatoms in the observable universe, and go has exponentiallymore moves than chess. Go masters are unable to explainhow they attain their supremacy beyond a profound senseof what feels right for any given situation on the board. So itwas assumed that the computer was doing something similar.Breathless articles in the press announced a new era of humanised software. Computers were on the threshold of thinkinglike us, imitating our often ill-defined reasons for our judgements and choices. In a counter-move and in a pioneering spiritof open access, Turing and Hassabis put their software online.In media interviews they described the process of machinedeep learning and neural networks. Turing attempted laymanexplanations of the Monte Carlo tree search, an algorithmelaborated during the forties' Manhattan Project to developthe first atom bomb. He became famously irritable when heattempted, overambitiously, to explain PSPACE-completemathematics to an impatient television interviewer. Less wellknown was his loss of temper on an American cable channelas he described a problem central to computer science, P versusNP. He was in front of a combative studio audience of ordinary"folk." He had recently published his solution, which math ematicians around the world were then checking. As a problem it was easy to state, formidably difficult to resolve. Turingwas trying to suggest that a correct positive solution wouldinitiate exciting discoveries in biology as well as in concepts ofspace and time and creativity. The audience did not share orunderstand his excitement. They had only a dim awareness ofhis role in the Second World War, or of his influence on theirown computer-dependent lives. They regarded him as the perfect English gentleman egghead and enjoyed tormenting himwith stupid questions. The unhappy episode marked the end ofhis mission to popularise his field.

Before the confrontation with the nine-dan Japanese gomaster, the luring--Hassabis computer played thousandsof matches against itself continuously for a year. It learnedfrom experience, and it was the scientists' claim--reasonableenough to have come a step closer to approximating humangeneral intelligence that gave rise to the legend of machineintuition. Nothing they said could bring the untethered storyback to earth.

Commentators who suggested that the computer's victory would make the game extinct were wrong. After his fifthdefeat, the elderly go master, helped by an assistant, stoodslowly, bowed towards the laptop and congratulated it in atrembling voice. He said, "The mounted horse did not kill athletics. We run for joy." He was right. The game, with its simplerules and boundless complexity, became even more popular.As with the post-war defeat of a chess grandmaster, the triumph of the machine could not diminish the game. Winning,it was said, was less important than pleasure in the intricaciesof the contest. But the idea that there was now software thatcould eerily, accurately "read" a situation, or a face, a gestureor the emotional timbre of a remark was never dislodged andpartly explained the interest when the Adams and Eves cameon the market.

Fifteen years is a long time in computer science. The processing power and sophistication of my Adam was far greaterthan that of the go computer. The technology advanced andTuring moved on. He spent concentrated time looking atdecision-making and wrote a celebrated book: we are disposedto make patterns, narratives, when we should be thinkingprobabilistically if we want to make good choices. Artificialintelligence could improve on what we had, on what we were.Turing devised the algorithms. All his innovative work wasavailable to others. Adam must have benefited.

Turing's institute drove forward AI and computationalbiology. He said he wasn't interested in becoming richer thanhe already was. Hundreds of prominent scientists followedhis example on open-source publication, which would lead, in1987, to the collapse of the journals Nature and Science. He wasmuch criticised for that. Others said that his work had createdtens of thousands of jobs around the world in diverse fields computer graphics, medical scanning devices, particle accelerators, protein folding, smart electricity distribution, defence,space exploration. No one could guess the end of such a list.By living openly from 1969 with his lover, Tom Reah, thetheoretical physicist who would win the Nobel Prize in 1989,Turing helped give weight to a gathering social revolution.When the AIDS epidemic broke out he raised a huge sum toset up a virology institute in Dundee and was co-founder of ahospice. After the first effective treatments appeared, he campaigned for short licences and low prices, especially in Africa.He continued to collaborate with Hassabis, who had run hisown group since 1972. Turing gradually lost patience withpublic engagements, so he said, and preferred to concentrateon his work in "my shrinking years." Behind him were hislong residency in San Francisco, the Presidential Medal ofFreedom and a banquet in his honour with President Carter,lunch with Mrs. Thatcher at Chequers to discuss science funding, dinner with the President of Brazil to persuade him toprotect the Amazon. For a long while he was the face of thecomputer revolution, and the voice of the new genetics, almostas famous as Stephen Hawking. Now he was a near-recluse.His only journeys were between his house in Camden Townand his institute in King's Cross, two doors down from theHassabis Centre.

Reah wrote a long poem about his and Turing's lifetogether, published in the TLS and then in book form. Thepoet and critic Ian Hamilton said in a review, "Here is a physicist who can imagine as well as scan. Now bring me the poetwho can explain quantum gravity." When Adam appeared inmy life, I believed that only a poet, not a machine, could tellme if Miranda would ever love me, or lie to me.

There must have been Turing algorithms buried in thesoftware of the Exocet series 8 missiles that a French company,MBDA, had sold to the Argentine government. This fearsomeweapon, once fired from a jet in the general direction of aship, could recognise its profile and decide mid-flight whetherit was hostile or friendly. If the latter, it aborted its missionand plunged harmlessly into the sea. If it missed its targetand overshot, it was able to double back and make two moreattempts. It closed on its prey at 5,000 miles an hour. Its optout capacity was probably based on face-recognition softwarethat Turing developed in the mid-sixties. He had been looking for ways to help people with prosopagnosia, a condition inwhich sufferers are unable to recognise familiar faces. Government immigration control, defence companies and securityfirms raided the work for their own purposes.

Since France was a NATO partner, strong representationswere made to the Elysee Palace by our government that MBDAshould be prevented from selling more Exocets or from providing technical assistance. A consignment bound for Peru,Argentina's ally, was blocked. But other countries, includingIran, were willing to sell. There was also a black market. British agents, posing as arms dealers, bought up the supply.But the spirit of the free market was irrepressible. TheArgentinian military desperately needed help with the Exocetsoftware, which had not been fully installed by the time theconflict began. Two Israeli experts, acting on their own, pre sumably on the offer of huge financial reward, flew to Argentina. It was never discovered who cut their throats in a BuenosAires hotel. Many assumed it was British intelligence agents.If so, they were too late. On the day the young Israelis bledto death in their beds, four British ships were sunk, the nextday another three went down, and on the third another. Inall, an aircraft carrier, destroyers, frigates and a troop carrierwere sunk. The loss of life was in the low thousands. Sailors,troops, cooks, doctors and nurses, journalists. After days ofconfusion, with all military efforts concentrated on rescuingsurvivors, the rump of the Task Force turned back and theFalkland Islands became Las Malvinas. The fascist junta thatruled Argentina was jubilant, its popularity soared, its murder,given. Its hold on power was consolidated.

torture and disappearances of its citizens were forgotten or forI watched it all, horrified--and guilty. Having thrilledto the sight of the warships filing down the English Channel, despite my opposition to the venture, I was implicated,along with nearly everyone else. Mrs. Thatcher came out of 10Downing Street to make a statement. First she couldn't speak,then she was tearful but refused to be helped back inside.1* inally she recovered and, in an untypically small voice, madethe famous "I take it on my shoulders" speech. She assumedfull responsibility. She would never outlive the shame. Sheoffered her resignation. But the shock to the nation of so manydeaths was profound and there was no appetite for heads toroll. If she had to go, so did her entire cabinet, and most of thecountry. A leader in the Telegraph put it thus: "The failurebelongs to us all. This is not the occasion for scapegoats." Avery British process began, reminiscent of the Dunkirk disas ter, by which a terrible defeat was transformed into a mournful victory. National unity was all. Six weeks later, 1.5 millionpeople were in Portsmouth to greet the returning ships withtheir cargoes of corpses, their burned and traumatised passengers. The rest of us watched it on television in horror.I repeat this well-known history for the benefit of youngerreaders who won't be aware of its emotional impact, andbecause it formed a melancholy background to our threecornered household. The rent was due and I was concernedby a loss of income. There was no mass purchase of hand-heldUnion Jacks, champagne consumption was down, and thegeneral economy was in trouble, though pubs and hamburgers went on as before. Miranda was lost to her father's illnessand to the Corn Laws and the historical viciousness of vestedinterests, their indifference to suffering. Meanwhile, Adamremained under the blanket. Miranda's delay in starting workon him was in part due to technophobia, if that's the wordfor disliking being online and ticking boxes with a mouse. Inagged, and finally she agreed to make a start. A week afterthe remains of the Task Force returned to port, I set up the laptop on the kitchen table and brought up Adam's site. It wasn'tnecessary to wake him for her to begin. She picked up thecordless mouse, turned it over and stared at its underside withdistaste. I made her coffee and went into the bedroom to work.My portfolio had halved in value. I was supposed to berecouping losses. But the thought of her next door was a distraction. As so often in the mornings, I dwelt on our nightbefore. The misery enveloping the country had made it all themore intense. Then we had talked. She described at length herchildhood, an idyll shattered by her mother's death when shewas eight. She wanted to take me to Salisbury and show methe important locations. I took this as a sign of progress but shehad yet to suggest a date, and she hadn't said that she wantedme to meet her father.

I was facing my screen without seeing it. The walls andespecially the door were thin. She was making very slow prog ress. At long intervals, I made out a deliberate click as she registered a choice. The silence between made me tense. Open toexperience? Conscientious? Emotionally stable? After an hourI was getting nowhere and decided to go out. I kissed the topof her head as I squeezed past her chair. I left the house and setoff towards Clapham.

It was unusually hot for April. The traffic down ClaphamHigh Street was heavy, the pavements were crowded. Everywhere, black ribbons. 1 he idea had crossed from the UnitedStates. On lampposts and doors, in shop windows, on car doorhandles and aerials, on pushchairs, wheelchairs and bikes.In central London, on official buildings where Union Jackswere at half mast, black ribbons dangled from the flagpolesfor the 2,920 dead. Black ribbons were worn as armbands andon lapels I was wearing one myself and so was Miranda. Iwould find one for Adam. Women and girls and flamboyanttied them in their hair. The passionate minority who hadargued and marched against the invasion wore them too. Forpublic figures and celebrities, including the royal family, iting watch.

was hazardous not to wear one--the popular press was keepI had no ambition but to walk off my restless state. Iincreased my pace through the business end of the HighStreet. I passed the boarded-up office of the Anglo-ArgentinianFriendship Society. A rubbish collectors' walkout was in itssecond week. The bags piled round lampposts were waist-highand the heat was generating a sweet stench. The public, or itspress, agreed with the prime minister that a strike at such atime was an act of heartless disloyalty. But the wage demandswere as inevitable as the next rise in inflation. No one knewyet how to dissuade the snake from eating its tail. Very soon,perhaps by the end of the year, stoical robots of negligibleintelligence would be picking up the rubbish. The men theydisplaced would be even poorer. Unemployment was at sixteenper cent.

By the curry house and along the greasy pavement outsidethe fast-food chains, the smell of rotting meat was a force thathit the chest. I held my breath until I was past the Tube station. I crossed the road and walked onto the Common. Therewere shouts and squeals rising from a crowd by the boatingand paddling pool. Even some of the kids splashing about werewearing ribbons. It was a happy scene but I didn't linger. Inthese new times a solitary man had to be wary of seeming tostare at children.

So I strolled over to Holy Trinity Church, a huge brick Ageof Reason shed. There was no one inside. As I sat, hunched for ward, elbows on knees, I could have been mistaken for a worshipper. It was too reasonable a place to evoke much awe, butits clean lines and sensible proportions were soothing. I wascontent to stay a while in the cool gloom and let my thoughtsdrift back to our very first night together when I'd been wokenby a prolonged howl. I thought a dog was in the room and Iwas half out of bed before I came to and realised that Mirandawas having a nightmare. It wasn't easy to wake her. She wasstruggling, as if fighting with someone, and twice she mumbled, "Don't go in. Please." Afterwards I thought it would helpher to describe the dream. She was lying on my arm, clingingto me tightly. When I asked her again, she shook her head, andsoon she was asleep.

In the morning, over coffee, she shrugged my question away. Just a dream. That moment of evasion stood outbecause Adam was behind us, making a good job of cleaningthe window, which I had told him, rather than asked him,to do. While we were talking, he had paused and turned, asif intrigued to hear an account of a nightmare. I wonderedthen if he himself was subject to dreams. He was on my conscience now. My command that morning had been snappish. Ishouldn't have treated him like a servant. Later that day I hadpowered him down. I had left him switched off too long. HolyTrinity Church was associated with William Wilberforce andthe anti-slavery movement. He would have promoted the causeof the Adams and Eves, their right not to be bought and soldand destroyed, their dignity in self-determination. Perhapsthey could take care of themselves. Soon they'd be doing thedustmen's jobs. Doctors and lawyers were next in line. Patternrecognition and faultless memory were even easier to computethan gathering up the city's filth.

We could become slaves of time without purpose. Thenwhat? A general renaissance, a liberation into love, friendshipand philosophy, art and science, nature worship, sports andhobbies, invention and the pursuit of meaning? But genteelrecreations wouldn't be for everyone. Violent crime had itsattractions too, so did bare-knuckle cage-fighting, VR pornog raphy, gambling, drink and drugs, even boredom and depression. We wouldn't be in control of our choices. I was proof ofthat.

I wandered out across the open spaces of the Common. Fifteen minutes later I reached the far side and decided to turnback. By now Miranda should have made at least a third ofher decisions. I was impatient to be with her before she set offfor Salisbury. She would be back late that night. I was restingfrom the heat in the narrow shade of a silver birch. A few yardsaway was a fenced-in little swing park for children. A smallboy--I guessed he was about four years old--dressed in baggygreen shorts, plastic sandals and a stained white t-shirt, wasbent over by a see-saw examining an object on the ground. Hetried to dislodge it with his foot, then he crouched down andgot his fingers to it.

I hadn't noticed his mother sitting on a bench with herback to me. She called out sharply, "Get here!"

The boy looked up, seemed about to go towards her, thenhis attention returned to the interesting thing on the ground.Now he had moved, I saw it myself. It was a bottle top, glintingdully, perhaps embedded in the softened tarmac.

The woman's back was broad, her hair black, curly, thinning towards the crown. In her right hand was a cigarette. Herelbow was cupped in her left hand. Despite the heat, she waswearing a coat. Below the collar was a long tear.

"D'you hear me?" The threat was on a rising note. Againthe child looked up and seemed fearful and bound to obey. Hetook a half-step, but as his gaze shifted, he saw his prize againand faltered. When he went back to it, he may have thoughthe could lever it free and take it to his mother. But what hemay have reasoned didn't matter. With a yelp of frustration,the woman leaped from the bench, crossed the few yards ofplayground at speed and dropped her cigarette as she grabbedthe boy by his arm and smacked his bare legs. At the instant ofhis first cry, she smacked him again, and a third time.I'd been comfortable in my thoughts and was reluctant tobe taken from them. For a moment I thought I could head forhome, pretending, if not to myself, then to the world, that I'dseen nothing. There was nothing I could do about this littleboy's life.

His screams were angering his mother further. "Shut up!"she shouted at him over and over again. "Shut up! Shut up!"Even then I might have forced myself to ignore the scene.But as the boy's shrieks grew louder, she seized his shouldersin two hands, pulling his dirty t-shirt clear of his belly, andbegan to shake him hard.

1 here are some decisions, even moral ones, that are formedin regions below conscious thought. I found myself joggingtowards the playground's fence, stepping over it, taking threepaces and putting a hand on the woman's shoulder.

I said, "Excuse me. Please. Please don't do that."

My voice sounded prissy in my ears, privileged, apologetic,lacking all authority. I was already doubting where this couldlead. Not to a future of reformed, kindly parenting. But at least,as she turned towards me in disbelief, her assault had ceased."What was that?"

"He's just little," I said stupidly. "You could do him seriousharm."

"Who the fuck are you?"

It was the right question and for that reason I didn't answerit. "He's too little to understand you."

This conversation was proceeding over the child's screams.Now he clutched at his mother's skirts, wanting to be pickedup. This was the worst of it. His tormentor was also his onlycomfort. She was squaring up to me. The dropped cigarette smouldered by her foot. Her right hand clenched andunclenched. Trying to appear not to, I took a vague half-stepback. We were staring each other out. It was, or had been, arather lovely, intelligent face, its obvious beauty marred byweight gain plumping up the flesh round her eyes, narrowingthem into a look of suspicion. In another life it could have beena kindly, maternal face. Rounded, high cheekbones, a slew offreckles across the bridge of her nose, full lips--though thelower was split. After several seconds, I noticed that her pupilswere pinpricks. She was the first to shift her gaze. She waslooking over my shoulder and then I found out why.

She yelled, "Oi, John."

I turned. Her friend or husband, John, also plump, nakedfrom the waist, bright pink from a bout in the sun, was on hisway through the playground's wire gate.

Still several yards away he called, "He bothering you?""Fucking right."

In some other sector of all imagined possibilities--thecinematic would be one-I needn't have worried. John wasabout my age, but shorter, flabbier, less fit, less strong. In thatother world, if he'd struck me, I could have floored him. But inthis world, I'd never hit another person in my life, not even inchildhood. I could have told myself that if I knocked the fatherdown the child would suffer all the more. But that wasn't it.I had the wrong attitude, or rather, I lacked the right one. Itwasn't fear, it certainly wasn't lofty principle. When it cameto hitting people, I didn't know where to begin. I didn't wantto know.

"Oh yeah?"

Now John was squaring up to me, the woman havingstepped back. The boy continued to wail. Father and son werecomically alike--both crop-haired, ginger-blond, with smallfaces and wide-apart green eyes.

"With all respect, he's just little. He shouldn't be hit orshaken."

"With all respect, you can fuck off out of it. Or else."And John did look ready to hit me. His chest was puffedout, the ancient self-enlargement ploy of toads and apes andmany others. His breathing was rapid and his arms hung wellclear of his torso. I may have been stronger, but he would bemore reckless. Less to lose. Or this was what bravery was.Being ready to take a chance on not getting felled and yourhead lifted and slammed down on the tarmac many times,with lifelong neural consequences. A chance I wouldn't take.This was what cowardice was, a surfeit of imagining.

I raised both hands in a gesture of surrender. "Look. I can'tmake you do anything, obviously. I can only hope to persuadeyou. For the little boy's benefit."

Then John said something so surprising that I was completely outflanked and for a moment could hardly reply."Do you want him?"

"What?"

"You can have him. Go on. You're an expert on kids. He'syours. Take him home with you."

The child had gone quiet by this point. Looking at himagain, I thought he had something his father lacked, thoughperhaps not his mother--a faint but still luminous signal inhis expression of intelligent engagement, despite his distress.We stood in a tight little group. From far across the Commonwe heard, above the traffic, the distant shouts of children bythe paddling pool.

On an impulse, I called the father's bluff. "All right," Iwork later."

said. "He can come and live with me. We'll sort out the paperI took a card from my wallet and gave it to him. Then Iput my hand out to the boy and to my surprise he raised hisand slotted his fingers between mine. I felt flattered. "What'shis name?"

"Mark."

"Come on, Mark."

Together we walked away from his parents, across theplayground to the spring-hinged gate.

The little boy said in a loud whisper, "Let's pretend to runaway." His upturned face was suddenly alive with humourand mischief.

"OK."

"On a boat."

"All right."

I was about to open the gate when there was a shoutbehind me. I turned, hoping that my relief didn't show. Thewoman came running at me, pulled the boy away and swungat me with an open hand. The blow fell harmlessly against myupper arm.

"Pervert!"

She was ready to take another swing when John called outin a weary tone. "Leave it."

I let myself out and walked a little way before stopping tolook back. John was hoisting Mark onto his raw shoulders. I hadto admire the father. There may have been wit in his methodswhich I'd failed to notice. He had got rid of me without a fightby making an impossible offer. What a nightmare, to drag theboy back to my tiny place, introduce him to Miranda, thensee to his needs for the next fifteen years. I noticed that thewoman had a black ribbon tied to the arm of her coat. Shewas trying to persuade John to take his shirt. He was ignoringher. As the family crossed the playground, Mark turned in mydirection and raised an arm, perhaps to maintain his balance,perhaps in farewell.

In our side-by-side conversations in bed, often in the earlyhours, a figure presided whose form was becoming clearer ashe hovered before us in the darkness, an unfortunate ghost. Ihad to overcome an initial impulse to regard him as a rival,hostile to my very existence. 1 looked him up online and sawhis face through time, from early twenties to mid-fifties, evolving from girlishly handsome to appealingly ruined. I read hispress, which was not extensive. His name meant nothing tome. A couple of my friends knew of him but had never readhim. A profile, five years old, dismissed him as "an almostman." Since the phrase described one of my own possiblefates, I warmed a little to Maxfield Blacke, and understoodthe obvious--that to love the daughter would be to embracethe father. Whenever she returned from Salisbury, she neededto talk about him. I learned about his different pains, or ago nies, the shifting prognoses, the arrogant, ignorant doctor followed by the kind and brilliant doctor, the chaotic hospitalwith surprisingly good food, the treatments and medications,the fresh hopes abandoned, then restored. His mind, she foundcountless ways of saying, remained sharp. It was his body thathad turned against him, against itself, with the ferocity of acivil war. How it hurt the daughter to see the writer's tonguedisfigured by ugly black spots. How it hurt the father to eat, toswallow, to speak. His immune system was letting or takinghim down.

There was more. He passed a large kidney stone, as excruciating, Miranda believed, as natural childbirth. He broke ahip on the bathroom floor. His skin itched intolerably. Now hehad gout in the joints of both thumbs. Reading, his passion,was made difficult as cataracts clouded his vision. The operation was ahead of him, though he hated and feared anyonemessing with his eyes. There may have been other afflictionstoo humiliating to recount. The woman he should have askedlong ago to be his fourth wife had walked out two years ago.Maxfield was alone, dependent on health visitors, strangers,and on his daughter, ninety miles distant. His two sons byanother marriage sometimes travelled from London, bringing presents of wine, cheese, biographies, the latest wristwatchmate care.

computer. But they were squeamish about their father's intiWe weren't old enough, Miranda and I, to understandfully that a man in his late fifties was still too young to expector deserve such multiple insults. But his resemblance to Jobtortured by his pitiless God made it seem blasphemous to doanything but listen to Miranda. The night after my encounter in the playground stood out. Hard to believe of a man inlove, but my mind wandered as she talked about him. She wasjust back from Salisbury, describing a fresh torment as we layin bed. Sympathetically, I took her hand as she talked. Theconstant sufferings of a man I had never met could only holdme so long. Half listening, I was free to contemplate my life'sstrange new turns.

Downstairs, still on the same hard wooden chair, myinteresting toy waited under its blanket, its merged personality installed that afternoon while it slept. The adventureabout to begin. At my side was my future, I was sure of it. Theimbalance in our feelings for each other would be righted. Wewere simply the embodiment of a pattern in modern manners:acquaintance, followed by sex, then friendship, finally love.There was no good reason we should travel this conventionalcourse at the same speed. Patience was all.

Meanwhile, surrounding my islet of hopes was an ocean ofnational sorrow. With ghastly timing, the junta had raised thatday 406 Argentine flags in Port Stanley, one for each of theirdead, and staged a military parade along the deserted, soddenmain street, while in London, in St. Paul's, a commemorationservice was held for our 5,000. I watched it on television afterI returned from the Common. There could hardly have beentwo dozen in that vast congregation of the ruling elite whothought that a God who preferred fascism to the Union Jackwas worth the candle, or that the departed reposed in eternal bliss. But secular tradition couldn't provide such familiarverses polished to a gleam by the long-discarded sincerity ofprevious generations. Man that is born of woman hath but ashort time to live. So the hymns were sung, the impenetrable,echoing readings intoned, the responses returned in raggedunison, while the rest of us mourned at the altars of our TVsets. Unlike Miranda, I mourned too.

With a million and a half others I had "marched" throughcentral London to protest against the Task Force. In fact wecrept along, stopping to wait at many bottlenecks. The usualparadox held: the matter was grave, the demonstration joyous.Rock bands, jazz bands, drums and trumpets, witty banners,wild costumes, circus skills, speeches, and above all the exhilaration of such numbers, taking hours to file past, so diverse,so clearly decent. So easy to believe that the whole nation hadinvaded London to make the obvious point that the comingwar was unjust, inhumane, illogical, potentially catastrophic.We couldn't know just how right we Were. Or how effectivelyParliament, the tabloids, the military and two-thirds of thenation would dismiss us. It was said we were unpatriotic,tional law.

defending a fascist regime and opposing the rule of internaWhere was Miranda that day? We barely knew eachother then. She was in the library, making the final changesto her half-wild-pigs paper. She had unusual ideas about theTask Force for someone in her twenties, and she distrustedthe spirit of what she called a "self-loving crowd," its easylike-mindedness, its stupid high spirits. She didn't share myaptitude for protest or sentiment. She was not interested inwatching the ships leave, or in what came to be known asThe Sinking, or the inglorious return and still less the servicein St. Paul's. Where I had talked with friends about nothingelse for months and read every opinion on the affair, Mirandastayed away. When the ships sank, she was silent. When theblack ribbons appeared, she wore one, but she wouldn't bedrawn. As she put it, the whole episode "stank."

Now, as I lay beside her with her hand in mine, the orangestreetlights beyond the curtains gave her bedroom the appearance of a stage set. She had taken the last train home andwaited for a delayed lube to Clapham North. It was almostthree o'clock. She was describing how Maxfield had told herruefully that the gout in his thumbs was a blessing. The painwas so ferocious and localised that his other complaints hadfaded.

I was still holding her hand. I said, "You know how muchI want to meet him. Let me come with you next time.''Several seconds passed before she drowsily replied, "I'dlike to go very soon."

"Good."

Then, after another pause, "Adam must come too."

She stroked my forearm in a gesture of farewell as sheturned on her side, away from me. Soon her breathing wasregular and deep, and I was left pondering in the monochromesodium dusk. He's coming too. She had assumed joint ownership, just as I'd hoped. But an encounter between Adam andan old-style literary curmudgeon like Maxfield Blacke washard to envisage. I knew from the profile that he still workedin longhand, detested computers, mobile phones, the Internetand all the rest. Apparently he didn't, in that priggish cliche,"suffer fools gladly." Or robots. Adam had yet to be woken. Hehad yet to leave the house, yet to test his luck as a plausiblebeing capable of small talk. I'd already decided to keep himaway from my circle of friends until he was a fully adept socialcreature. Starting out with Maxfield could disable importantsub-routines. Miranda might have been hoping to distract herfather and energise his writing. Or it was to do with me, somehow in my interests in ways I didn't understand. Or--I failedto resist this thought--against them?

That was a bad idea, of the kind that comes in the smallhours. Like all insomniac brooding, the essence was repetition. Why should I meet her father in the presence of Adam?Of course, it was entirely in my power to insist on keeping himhere. But I would be denying the wishes of a woman whosefather lay dying. Was he really dying? Was it possible to getgout in your thumb? Bilaterally? Did I really know Miranda?I lay on my side, seeking a cool corner of the pillow, then onmy back with a view of a dappled ceiling that now seemedtoo close, and yellow rather than orange. I asked myself thesame questions, I rephrased them and asked them again. Iknew what I was about to do, but I delayed, preferring to fret,denying the obvious for almost an hour. Then at last I got up,foot down the communal stairs to my own flat.

pulled on my jeans and t-shirt, let myself out and went bare In the kitchen I didn't even pause before pulling the blanket clear. Outwardly nothing had changed--eyes closed, thatsame bronze face, the nose with its hint of cruelty. I reachedbehind his head, found the spot and pressed. While he waswarming up I ate a bowl of cereal.

Just as I was finishing he said, "Never be disappointed.""What was that?"

"I was saying that those who believe in the afterlife willnever be disappointed."

"\ou mean, if they're wrong they'll never know about it.""Yes."

I looked at him closely. Was he different now? He had anexpectant look. "Logical enough. But Adam. I hope you don'tthink that's profound."

He didn t reply. I took my empty bowl to the sink and mademyself tea. I sat at the table, across from him, and after takinga couple of sips, I said, "Why did you say that I shouldn't trustMiranda?"

"Oh, that. .

"Come on."

"I spoke out of turn and I'm truly sorry."

"Answer the question."

His voice had changed. It was firmer, more expressive inits varied pitch. But the attitude--I needed more time. Myimmediate, unreliable impression was of an intact presence."I was thinking only of your best interests."

"You just said you were sorry."

"That's correct."

"I need to hear why you said what you did."

"There's a small but significant possibility that she mightharm you."

I disguised my irritation and said, "How significant?""In the terms set by Thomas Bayes, the eighteenthcentury clergyman, I'd say one in five, assuming you acceptmy values for the priors."

My father, adept at the harmonic progressions of bebop,was a sincere technophobe. He used to say that any faulty electrical device needed no more than a good thump. I drank mytea and considered. In the colossal array of tree-branching networks that governed Adam's decision-making, there would bea strong weighting in favour of reasonableness.

cant, close to zero."

"I see. I'm so sorry."

"We all make mistakes."

"We certainly do."

"How many mistakes have you made in your life, Adam?"

"Only this one."

"Then it's important."

"Yes."

"And important not to repeat it."

"Of course."

I said, "I happen to know that the possibility is insignifi"So we need to analyse how you came to make it, wouldn'tyou say?"

"I agree."

"So, in this regrettable process what was your first move?"He spoke confidently now, seeming to take pleasure indescribing his methods. "I have privileged access to all courtrecords, criminal as well as the Family Division, even whenin camera. Miranda's name was anonymised, but I matchedthe case against other circumstantial factors that are also notgenerally available."

"Clever."

"Thank you."

"Tell me about the case. And the date and place."

" I he young man, you see, knew very well that the firsttime he had intimate relations with her . . ."

He broke off and stared at me, bug-eyed in astonishment,as though he was taking in my presence for the first time. Iguessed my short run of discovery was coming to a close. Heappeared now to know about the value of reticence.

"Go on."

"Uh, she brought along a half-bottle of vodka."

"Give me a date and place and the man's name. Quick!"

"October the . . . Salisbury. But look--"Then he began to giggle, a silly, hissing sound. It wasembarrassing to witness, but I couldn't look away. On his facewas a complicated look--of confusion, of anxiety, or mirthlesshilarity. The user's handbook claimed that he had forty facialexpressions. The Eves had fifty. As far as I knew, the averageamong people was fewer than twenty-five.

"Get a grip, Adam. We agreed. We need to understandyour mistake."

It took him more than a minute to get himself under control. I drank the last of my tea and watched what I knew to bea complex process. I understood that personality was not likea shell, encasing and constraining his capacity for coherentthought; that his deviousness, if that was what motivated him,did not live downstream of reason. Nor did mine. His rational impulse to collaborate with me may have pulsed throughhis neural networks at half the speed of light, but it wouldnot have been suddenly barred at the logic gate of a freshlydevised persona. Instead, these two elements were entwined attheir origins, like the snakes of Mercury's caduceus. Adam sawthe world and understood it through the prism of his personality; his personality was at the service of his objectifying reasonand its constant updates. From the beginning of our conversation, it had been simultaneously in his interests to avoid arepetition of an error and to withhold information from me.When the two became incompatible, he became incapacitated and giggled like a child in church. Whatever we hadchosen for him lay far upstream of the branching intricacy ofhis decision-making. In a different dispensation of characterhe might simply have fallen silent; in another, he might havebeen compelled to tell me everything. A case could be madefor both.

I now knew a little more than nothing, enough to worryabout, not enough to follow up, even if I'd had access to theclosed sessions of the courts: Miranda as witness, victim orber in Salisbury.

accused, sex with a young man, vodka, a courtroom, one Octo Adam had fallen silent. His expression, the special material of his face, indistinguishable from skin, relaxed intowatchful neutrality. I could have gone upstairs and wokenMiranda to confront her with the obvious questions and geteverything clear between us. Or I could wait and reflect, holding back what I knew in order to grant myself the illusion ofcontrol. A case could be made for both.

But I didn't hesitate. I went into my bedroom, undressed,leaving my clothes in a heap on my desk, and lay down nakedunder the summer duvet. It was already light. I would haveliked to be soothed and hear, above the dawn chorus, the soundof the milkman going from door to door, clinking his bottleson the steps. But the last of the electric-powered milk floatshad vanished from our streets. A shame. Still, I was tired andsuddenly comfortable. I here's a special sensuousness in anunshared bed, at least for a period, until sleeping alone beginsto assume its own quiet sadness.

n the waiting room of the local doctor's practice, a dozenjunk-shop dining-room chairs were arranged round thewalls of what had once been a Victorian front parlour.In the centre was a low plywood table with spindly metal legsand a few magazines, greasy to the touch. I had picked one upand immediately put it back. In one corner, some colourfulbroken toys, a headless giraffe, a car with a missing wheel,gnawed plastic bricks, kindly donated. There were no infantsin our group of nine. I was keen to avoid the gaze of the others,their small talk or ailment-swapping. I kept my breathingshallow in case the air around me swarmed with pathogens. Ididn't belong here. I wasn't ill, my problem was not systemicbut peripheral, a toenail. I was the youngest in the room,surely the fittest, a god among mortals, with an appointmentnot with the doctor but with the nurse. I remained beyondmortality's reach. Decay and death were for others. I expectedmy name to be called first. It turned out to be a long wait. Iwas second to last.

On the wall opposite me was a cork noticeboard with flyers promoting early detection of this or that, healthy living,dire warnings. I had time to read them all. A photographshowed an elderly man in cardigan and slippers standing by awindow. Without raising a hand to his mouth, he was lustilysneezing in the direction of a laughing little girl. Backlighting illuminated tens of thousands of particles flying towardsher--minute droplets of fluid teeming with germs shared byan old fool.

I reflected on the long strange history that lay behind thistableau. The idea that germs were responsible for the spread ofdisease didn't gain general acceptance until the 1880s and thework of Louis Pasteur and others, only a hundred years beforethis poster was devised. Until then, against a few dissenters,the miasma theory prevailed--disease originated in bad air,bad smells, decomposition, or even in night air, against whichwindows were properly closed. But the device that could havespoken truth to medicine was available 200 years before Pasteur. The amateur scientist of the seventeenth century whoknew best how to make and use the device was known to thescientific elite of London.

When Antonie van Leeuwenhoek, solid citizen of Delft,a draper and a friend of Vermeer, began sending his observations of microscopic life to the Royal Society in 1673, herevealed a new world and initiated a biological revolution. Hemeticulously described plant cells and muscle fibre, single-cellorganisms, his own spermatozoa, and bacteria from his ownmouth. His microscopes needed sunlight and had only a singlelens, but no one could grind them the way he could. He wasworking with magnification powers of 275 and above. By theend of his life, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Societyhad published 190 of his accounts.

Suppose there had been a young spark at the Royal Societylolling in the library after a good lunch, a copy of the Transactions on his lap, who began to speculate that some of thesetiny organisms might cause meat to putrefy, or could multiplyin the bloodstream and cause disease. There had been suchsparks at the Society before and there were many to come. Butthis one would have needed an interest in medicine as wellas scientific curiosity. Medicine and science would not becomefull partners until well into the twentieth century. Even inthe fifties, tonsils were regularly sliced from the throats ofhealthy children on the basis of standard practice rather thangood evidence. A doctor in Leeuwenhoek's time could easilybelieve that everything to be known in his field was alreadywell understood. The authority of Galen, active in the secondcentury, was near total. It would be a long time before medicalscope in order to learn the basics of organic life.

men, in general a grand lot, peered humbly down a microBut our man, whose name will become a household word,is different. His hypotheses will be possible to test. He borrows a microscope--Robert Hooke, honoured fellow of theSociety, will surely lend him one--and sets to. A germ theoryof disease begins to form. Others join in the research. Perhaps within twenty years surgeons are washing their handsbetween patients. The reputations of forgotten doctors likeHugh of Lucca and Girolamo Fracastoro are restored. By themid-eighteenth century, childbirth is safer; certain men andwomen of genius are born who otherwise would have died ininfancy. They might change the course of politics, the arts,the sciences. Loathsome figures who could do great harm alsospring up. In minor and possibly major ways, history follows adifferent course long after our brilliant young member of theRoyal Society has grown old and died.

The present is the frailest of improbable constructs. Itcould have been different. Any part of it, or all of it, couldbe otherwise. True of the smallest and largest concerns. Howeasy to conjure worlds in which my toenail had not turnedagainst me; in which I was rich, living north of the Thamesafter one of my schemes had succeeded; in which Shakespearehad died in childhood and no one missed him, and the UnitedStates had taken the decision to drop on a Japanese city theatomic bomb they had tested to perfection; or in which theFalklands Task Force had not set off, or had returned victorious and the country was not in mourning; in which Adam wasan assemblage far off in the future; or in which 66 millionyears ago the earth had turned for another few minutes beforethe meteor struck, so missing the sun-blotting, fine-grainedgypsum sand of the Yucatan, allowing the dinosaurs to live onand deny future space to the mammals, clever apes included.My treatment, when it came at last, began pleasantlywith my naked foot soaking in a bowl of hot, soapy water.Meanwhile, the nurse, a large, friendly woman from Ghana,arranged her steel instruments on a tray with her back to me.Her expertise was as complete as her self-confidence. Therewas no mention of anaesthesia and I was too proud to ask, butwhen she took my foot onto her aproned lap and set about herbusiness with my ingrowing toenail, I was not too proud tosqueak at the crucial moment. Relief was immediate. I mademy way along the street, as though on rubber wheels, to myhome, the centre of my preoccupations, which had latelyshifted from Miranda back to Adam.

His character was in, done, from two sources irreversiblymerged. A curious parent of a growing child might wonderwhich characteristics belonged to the father, which to themother. I was observing Adam closely. I knew which questionsMiranda had answered but I didn't know what she had decided.I noted that a certain blankness had gone from his face, thathe seemed more intact, smoother in his interactions withus and certainly more expressive. But I struggled to understand what it told me about Miranda or, for that matter, aboutmyself. In humans, recombination is infinitely subtle and thencrudely but disarmingly lopsided. The parents merge, like fluids stirred together, but the mother's face might be faithfullyreplicated in her child just as the father fails to pass on his giftfor comedy. I remembered little Mark's touching version ofhis father's features. But in Adam's personality, Miranda andI were well shuffled, and as in humans, his inheritance wasthickly overlaid by his capacity to learn. Perhaps he had mytendency to pointless theorising. Perhaps he had something ofMiranda's secretive nature and her self-possession, her tastefor solitude. Frequently he withdrew into himself, hummingor murmuring "Ah!" Then he would pronounce what he tookto be an important truth. His interrupted remark about theafterlife was the earliest example.

Another was when we were outside, in my tiny fractionof a back garden, marked off by a broken picket fence. He washelping to pull up weeds. It was just before sunset, the air wasstill and warm, suffused by an unreal amber light. A week hadpassed since our late-night exchange. I had brought him outside because his dexterity was still a matter of interest to me. Iwanted to watch him handle a hoe and a rake. More generally,my plan was to introduce him to the world beyond the kitchentable. We had friendly neighbours on both sides and there wasa chance that he could test his small-talk skills. If we were totravel together to Salisbury to meet Maxfield Blacke, I wantedto prepare Adam by taking him to some shops, and perhapsa pub. I was sure he could pass off as a person, but he neededto be more at ease, his machine-learning capacities neededstretching.

I was keen to see how good he was at identifying plants.Of course he knew everything. Feverfew, wild carrot, camomile. As he worked, he muttered the names, for his ownrather than my benefit. I saw him put on gardening glovesto pull up nettles. Mere mimicry. Later he straightened andlooked with apparent interest towards a spectacular westernsky intersected by power and telephone lines and a recedingjumble of Victorian roofs. His hands were on his hips and heleaned back, as though his lower back was giving him trouble.He took a deep breath to indicate his appreciation of the evening air. Then, out of nowhere, he said, "From a certain pointof view, the only solution to suffering would be the completeextinction of humankind."

Yes, this was why he needed to be out and about. Buriedwithin his circuitry there was probably a set of sub-routines:sociability/conversation/interesting openers.

But I decided to join in. "It's been said that killing everyone would be a cure for cancer. Utilitarianism can be logicallyabsurd."

He replied, "Obviously!" in an abrupt manner. I looked athim, surprised, and he turned away from me and bent againto his work.

Adam's insights, even when valid, were socially inept.On our first expedition away from home, we walked the 200yards to our local newsagent, Mr. Syed. We passed a few people in the street and no one gave Adam a second glance. Thatwas satisfying. Over bare skin he was wearing a tight yellowjumper, knitted by my mother in her last year. He had whitejeans and canvas loafers, bought for him by Miranda. She hadpromised to buy him a complete outfit of his own. With hisneat muscular bulge of chest and arms, he could have passedfor a personal trainer from the local gym.

chair through.

Where the pavement narrowed between a tree and a gar den wall, I saw how he stood aside to let a woman with a pushAs we neared the shop he said, somewhat absurdly, "It'sgood to get out."

Simon Syed had grown up in a large village thirty milesnorth of Calcutta. His English teacher at his school had beenan Anglophile, a martinet who had beaten into his pupils acourteous and precise English. I had never asked Simon howor why he had taken on a Christian forename. Perhaps adesire to integrate, or the parting insistence of his formidableteacher. He had arrived in north Clapham from Calcutta in hislate teens and immediately went to work in his uncle's shop.Thirty years later, the uncle had died and the shop passed tothe nephew, who still supported his aunt from the proceeds.He also supported a wife and three grown-up children, but hedidn't like to talk about them. He was a Muslim, by culturerather than practice. If there was sadness in his life, it was wellconcealed behind a dignified manner. Now in his mid-sixties,he was sleek, bald, very correct, with a small moustache thattapered to sharp points. There was an anthropology journal,not available on the Internet, that he kept for me. He didn'tmind when 1 came in to scan the world's front pages duringthe Task Force days. He was amused by my taste for low-gradechocolate--those global brands invented between two worldwars. In the mid-afternoons, after hours at my screen, I cravedsugar.

In that strange way by which one reserves intimacies for amere acquaintance, I had told Simon about my new girlfriend.When she and I had been in the shop together, he had seen forhimself.

Now, whenever I came by, his first question was always,"How are matters proceeding?" He liked to tell me, on thebasis of nothing but kindness, "It's clear. Her fate is you. Nododging it! Eternal happiness for you both." I sensed that manydisappointments were heaped behind him. He was old enoughto be my father and wanted for me what had eluded him.There were no other customers when Adam and I enteredthe cramped shop with its compound scent of newsprint, peanut dust and cheap toiletries. Simon rose from the woodenchair he sat on behind the till. Because I was not alone, hewould not be asking the usual question.

I made the introduction. "Simon. My friend Adam."

Simon nodded. Adam said, "Hello," and smiled.

1 was reassured. A good start. If Simon had noticed thestrange appearance of Adam's eyes, he didn't show it. It wasa common reaction, I would soon discover. People assumeda congenital deformity and politely looked away. Simon andI discussed the cricket--three consecutive sixes and a pitchinvasion at the India--England T20--while Adam stood apartbefore an array of canned goods on a shelf. They would beinstantly familiar to him, their commercial histories, market share, nutritional value. But as we chatted, it was obvioushe wasn't looking at tins of peas, or anything at all. His facewas frozen. He hadn't moved in two minutes. I worried thatsomething unusual or unpleasant was about to happen. Simonpolitely pretended he hadn't noticed. It was possible thatAdam had put himself in rest mode. I made a mental note: hewas in need of an appearance of plausibility whenever doingnothing. His eyes were open, but he failed to blink. PerhapsI had brought him out into the world too soon. Simon wouldbe offended that I had tried to pass off Adam as a person, afriend. It could look like mockery, a tasteless joke. I would havebetrayed a pleasant acquaintance.

The cricket banter began to falter. Simon's gaze settled onpos is in."

Adam, then returned to me. He said tactfully, "Your AnthroIt was my prompt to go over to the magazines, whereAdam stood. Years ago, Simon had cleared his top shelf of softporn in favour of specialist stuff--literary magazines, academic bulletins of international relations, history, entomology.A fair number of ageing, down-at-heel intellectuals lived inthe neighbourhood.

As I turned away he added, "You can get it yourself?" Aally reached up for me.

gentle tease to lower the tension. Simon was taller and he usuA single word brought Adam to life. With the faintestwhirring sound, which I hoped only I could hear, he turned toaddress Simon in formal terms. "Your self, you say. There's acoincidence. I've been giving some thought lately to the mystery of the self. Some say it's an organic element or processsion, a by-product of our narrative tendencies."

embedded in neural structures. Others insist that it's an illuThere was a silence, then, stiffening a little, Simon said,"Well, sir, which is it? What have you decided?"

"It's the way I'm made. I'm bound to conclude that I've avery powerful sense of self and I'm certain that it's real andthat neuroscience will describe it fully one day. Even when itdoes, I won't know this self any better than I do now. But I dohave moments of doubt when I wonder whether I'm subject toa form of Cartesian error."

fer to get along without a self."

"Indeed. I'd like to meet one. Do you know any?"

Simon was emphatic. "No, sir. Absolutely, I do not."

By this time I had the journal in my hands and was pre paring to leave. "Take the Buddhists," Simon said. "They preI raised a hand in farewell and thanks and, taking Adamby his elbow, guided him towards the door.

It was a cliche of romantic love, but no less painful forthat: the stronger my feelings, the more remote and unattainable Miranda appeared. How could I complain when she wasattained that very first night, after dinner? We had fun, wetalked easily, we ate and slept together most nights. But I wasgreedy for more, though I tried not to show it. I wanted her toopen up to me, to want me, need me, show some hunger forme, some delight in me. Instead, my initial impression held--she could take me or leave me. Everything good that passedbetween us--sex, food, movies, new plays--was instigated byme. Without me she drifted in silence towards her default condition upstairs, to a book on the Corn Laws, a bowl of cereal,a cup of weak herbal tea, curled up in an armchair, barefootand oblivious. Sometimes she sat for long periods without abook. If I put my head round her door (we now had keys toeach other's places) and said, "How about an hour of franticsex?" she would say calmly, "OK," and we would go into heror my bedroom and she would rise splendidly to her pleasuresand mine. When we were done she would take a shower andreturn to her chair. Unless I suggested something else. A glassof wine, a risotto, an almost famous sax player at a Stockwellpub. OK again.

To everything I proposed, indoors or out, she brought thesame tranquil readiness. Happy to hold my hand. But therewas something, or many things, I didn't understand, or shedidn't want me to know about. Whenever she had a seminaror needed to use the library, she returned from college in thelate afternoons. Once a week she came back later. It took me awhile to notice that it was always a Friday. Finally she told methat she went to the Regent's Park Mosque for Friday prayers.That surprised me. But no, she wasn't thinking of converting from atheism. She had in mind a social-history paper shemight write. I wasn't convinced, but I let it go.

What we lacked was conversational intimacy. We wereclosest when we argued about the Task Force. When we wentto a bar, her conversation was general. She was happy withher solitude or with lively chat about public matters, but therewas nothing personal in between, except her father's health orhis literary career. When I tried to ease us towards the past,perhaps angling in gently with something about myself or aquestion about her own history, she reached quickly for generalities or an account of the earliest years of her childhood,or an anecdote about someone she knew. I told her about myidiotic excursion into tax fraud, my experience of court andthe tedium of my hours of community service. I would havetold her anyway, but the story was my pretext to ask if sheherself had ever been in court. The answer was abrupt. Never!And then she changed the subject. I'd been in various promising affairs and in love, or almost in love, two or three timesbefore, depending on definitions. I fancied myself an expertand knew better than to put her under pressure. I still thoughtI might get more out of Adam on the Salisbury affair. If Ididn't know her secret, at least she didn't know I knew she hadone. Tact was everything. I still hadn't told her that I lovedher, or divulged my fantasies about our shared future or evenhinted at my frustration. I left her alone with her books or herthoughts whenever it suited her. Though the subject was notin the line of my interests, I worked up an acquaintance withthe Corn Laws and developed some ideas of my own about freetrade. She didn't dismiss them, but nor was she impressed.So here we were upstairs at dinner in her kitchen, whichwas even smaller than mine. The table was of white mouldedplastic, just big enough for two, probably stolen from a pubgarden by a previous tenant. Standing at the sink, up to hiselbows in suds, Adam dealt with the plates and cutlery we'dhanded him at the end of our meal--toad-in-the-hole, bakedbeans, fried eggs. Student food. On the windowsill, whereyellow gingham curtains hung still in our late-summer heatwave, a radio was playing the Beatles, recently regrouped aftertwelve years apart. Their album, Love and Lemons, had beenderided for its grandiosity, for failing to resist the lure andoverreach of an eighty-strong symphony orchestra. They couldnot master such forces, was the general drift, with half a lifetime's store of guitar chords. Nor did we wish to be told again,the Times critic complained, that love was all we needed, evenif it were true, which it was not.

But I liked the music's muscular sentimentality, emptiedof irony by these middle-aged performers, so confident andtuneful, liberated by useful ignorance of two and a half centuries of symphonic experimentation. Lennon's rasping voicefloated towards us from some faraway echoing place beyondthe horizon, or the grave. I didn't mind being told again aboutlove. Here before me were all of its warm possibilities, barelythree feet away, and it was all I needed. Here was her long,exquisitely shaped face (those angled cheekbones might breakthrough the skin one day), the amused gaze, at this point stillmerry, and narrowed, locked on me, the lips parted, for shewas about to speak against what I'd just said. Her perfect elongated nose flared faintly at the base of the nostrils' arch tosignal in advance her dissent. Her pallor set off her fine brownhair, tonight childishly parted dead centre. Against prevailingfashion, she kept out of the sun. Her bare white arms were alsothin and unblemished--not a single freckle.

From my point of view we still holidayed in the foothills,among possibilities whose fulfilment rose like distant alps. Itried to ignore them in order to attend to details. From herperspective, on the other side of this frail table, we may havealready reached our highest point. She may have thought shewas as close as she ever wanted to be, or could be, to anotherperson. Love stories like Jane Austen's used to conclude chastelywith preparations for a wedding. Now their climax lay on thefar side of carnal knowledge, where all of complexity waited.For now, my business was to conduct a political argumentwith her without feelings running high, then turning sour,and at the same time stay true to myself and let her do thesame. It was a feasible balancing act, as long as 1 drank lessthan half a bottle of the indifferent Medoc that stood betweenus. We'd had this conversation before and it should have beeneasier now, but repetition seemed like an indictment of usboth. We didn't really want to be talking about it. Impossibleto avoid, even though we knew it would lead nowhere. Butthis was how it was for everyone. We were all still tendingthe wound. How could Miranda and I spend our lives togetherwhen we couldn't agree on such a fundamental as war?

About the islands formerly known as the Falklands shehad firm views. She insisted that the Argentine flag-plantingon remote South Georgia had been a clear violation of international law. I said it was an inhospitable place and no oneshould be asked to fight to the death for it. She said that thetaking of Port Stanley was the desperate act of an unpopularregime looking to whip up patriotic fervour. I said this wasall the more reason not to get drawn in. She said the TaskForce was a brave and brilliant conception, even in failure.I said, uneasily remembering my emotional state when theships set off, that it was a ridiculous enactment of lost imperialgrandeur. How could I not see, she said, that this was an antifascist war? No (I spoke over her), it was a row over property,fed on each side by nationalistic stupidity. I summoned theBorges observation: two bald men fighting over a comb. Shereplied that a bald man might hand down his comb to his children. I was struggling to understand this when she added thatthe generals had tortured, disappeared and killed their citizens by the thousands and were running the economy into theground. If we'd taken back the islands, the humiliation wouldhave finished the military regime and democracy would havereturned to Argentina. I replied that she could not possiblyknow this. We had lost thousands of young men and womento the cause of Mrs. Thatcher's ambitions. My voice began torise before I remembered. I resumed quietly but with a certain tremor: that she remained in office after such slaughterwas the greatest political scandal of our time. I delivered thiswith a finality that deserved a moment's respectful silence, butMiranda came straight back to tell me that the prime ministerfailed in a decent cause and was supported by almost all ofParliament and the country and she was right to remain inoffice.

During this conversation, Adam finished with the dishesand stood with his back to the kitchen sink to watch us, armsfolded, his head turning from side to side, speaker to speaker,like a spectator at a tennis match. Our exchange was notexactly weary, but repetition had given it an air of ritual. Likefacing armies, we'd taken up our positions and intended tohold them. Miranda was telling me that the Task Force set offwithout proper ship-to-air missiles. The chiefs of staff let thearmed forces down. I used to hear terms like these--ship-toair, homing devices, titanium-tipped--at the Warwickshirestudent union bar, but only from men, men of the political left,whose opinions were complicated by tacit admiration for theweapon systems they condemned. In her soft and fluent delivery, she mingled these with other concepts from the lexicon ofestablished power--the open society, rule of law, restoration ofdemocracy. Perhaps it was her father I was hearing.

While she was speaking, I turned to catch Adam's expression. What I saw was his devoted attention. More than that. Alook of delight. He adored what she was saying. 1 turned backto Miranda as she reminded me that the Falklanders were myfellow citizens, now living under fascism. Was I happy withthat? I disliked this rhetorical turn. It was a masked insult.The conversation was turning sour, just as I'd feared, but Icouldn't help myself. In the tiny kitchen space, I was hot andirritable as I reached for the wine and filled my glass. Therecould have been a negotiated settlement, I started to say. Aslow and painless thirty-year transition, a UN mandate, guaranteed rights. She interrupted to inform me that we couldnever trust any undertaking by the murdering generals. Asshe said it, I saw them in caricature, in braided hats, campaignribbons, cavalry boots, and Galtieri on his white horse in aconfetti blizzard on the Avenida 25 de Mayo.

I said that I accepted every last one of her arguments. Theforces set off on their 8,000-mile mission, her risky strategywas tested and it failed. Thousands she never knew or caredabout were drowned or burned to death, or live on, maimed,disfigured, traumatised. We've arrived at the worst outcome:the junta possessed the island and its inhabitants. Whereas apolicy of slow, negotiated agreement wasn't tested, but if it hadfailed we would have reached the same outcome, without theagony and death. We couldn't know. What might have happened was lost to us. So what was there to argue about?I saw that the glass I'd filled, and had no memory of touching, was empty. And I was wrong. There was plenty to argueabout, for even as I said it, I knew I was crossing a line. I hadaccused her of not caring about the dead, and she was angry.Her eyes were narrowed, without merriment, but shedidn't address my transgression. Instead, she turned to Adamand asked quietly, "What's your view?"

His gaze travelled from her to me and back. I still didn'tknow whether he actually saw anything. An image on someinternal screen that no one was watching, or some diffused circuitry to orient his body in three-dimensional space? Seemingto see could be a blind trick of imitation, a social manoeuvre tofool us into projecting onto him a human quality. But I couldn'thelp it: when our eyes briefly met and I looked into the blueirises flecked with spears of black, the moment appeared richwith meaning, with anticipation. I wanted to know whetherhe understood, as I did, and as Miranda surely did, that theissue here was loyalty.

His tone was prompt and calm. "Invasion, success or failure. Negotiated settlement, success or failure. Four outcomesor effects. Without benefit of hindsight, we'd have to choosewhich causes to pursue, which to avoid. We'd be in the realmof Bayesian inverse probability. We'd be looking for the probable cause of an effect rather than the most likely effect of acause. Only sensible, to try and find a formal representation ofour guesswork. Our reference point, our datum, would be anobserver of the Falklands situation before any decisions weretaken. Certain a priori probability values are ascribed to thefour outcomes. As fresh information comes in, we can measurerelative changes in probability. But we can't possess an absolute value. It may help us to define the weight of new evidencelogarithmically, so that, assuming a base ten--""Adam. Enough! Really. What nonsense!" Now it wasMiranda who reached for the Medoc.

1 was relieved to be no longer the object of her irritation.I said, "But Miranda and I would ascribe completely differenta priori values."

Adam turned his head towards me. As always, too slowly."Of course. As I said, when describing the future there can beno absolute values. Only shifting degrees of likelihood.""But they're entirely subjective."

"Correct. Ultimately Bayes reflects a state of mind. Asdoes all of common sense."

Then nothing was solved, despite this high gloss of rationality. Miranda and I had different states of mind. What wasnew? But we were united against Adam in our differences. Atleast, this was my hope. He may have understood the relevantissue after all: he thought I was right about the Falklands and,given a degree of programmed intellectual honesty, the besthe could offer Miranda, to whom he was also loyal, was anappearance of neutrality. But if that was sound, why not acceptthe mirror possibility, that he believed Miranda was right andI was the one in receipt of loyal support?

With a sudden scrape of a kitchen chair, Miranda stood.There was a faint flush about her face and throat and shewasn't looking at me. We'd be sleeping in separate beds thatnight. I would have happily unsaid my entire argument to staywith her. But I was dumb.

She said to Adam, "You can stay up here to charge, if youlike."

Adam needed six hours a night connected to a thirteenamp socket. He went into sleep mode and sat quietly "reading"until after dawn. Usually he was in my kitchen downstairs,but recently Miranda had bought a second charging cable.He murmured his thanks and slowly folded a kitchentowel in half with close attention, hunched over the task, andspread it across the draining board. As she moved towards herbedroom door she shot me a look, a regretful smile that didn'tpart her lips, sent a conciliatory kiss across the space betweenus and whispered, "Just for tonight."

So we were fine.

I said, "Of course I know you care about the dead."

She nodded and left. Adam was sitting down, pulling hisshirt clear of his belt to locate the tethering point below hiswaistline. I put a hand on his shoulder and thanked him forclearing up.

For me, it was far too early for bed and it was hot, like asummer evening in Marrakech. I went downstairs and lookedin the fridge for something cool.

I remained in the kitchen, in an old leather armchair,with a balloon glass of Moldovan white. There was much pleasure in following a line of thought without opposition. I washardly the first to think it, but one could see the history ofhuman self-regard as a series of demotions tending to extinction. Once we sat enthroned at the centre of the universe, withsun and planets, the entire observable world, turning aroundus in an ageless dance of worship. Then, in defiance of thepriests, heartless astronomy reduced us to an orbiting planetaround the sun, just one among other rocks. But still we stoodapart, brilliantly unique, appointed by the creator to be lordsof everything that lived. Then biology confirmed that we wereat one with the rest, sharing common ancestry with bacteria, pansies, trout and sheep. In the early twentieth centurycame deeper exile into darkness when the immensity of theuniverse was revealed and even the sun became one amongbillions in our galaxy, among billions of galaxies. Finally, inconsciousness, our last redoubt, we were probably correct tobelieve that we had more of it than any creature on earth. Butthe mind that had once rebelled against the gods was about todethrone itself by way of its own fabulous reach. In the compressed version, we would devise a machine a little clevererthan ourselves, then set that machine to invent another thatlay beyond our comprehension. What need then of us?

Such hot-air thoughts deserved a second, bigger balloonand I poured it. Head propped in my right palm, I approachedthat ill-lit precinct where self-pity becomes a mellow pleasure. I was a special case of the general banishment, though itwasn't Adam I was thinking of. He wasn't cleverer than me.Not yet. No, my exile was for one night only and it gave a twistof sweet, bearable agony to a hopeless love. My shirt unbuttoned to the waist, all windows open, the urban romance ofgetting thoughtfully drunk amid the heat and dust and muteddin of north Clapham, in a world city. The imbalance of ouraffair was heroic. I imagined an onlooker's approving gazefrom a corner of the room. That well-formed figure slumpedin his beaten-up chair. I rather loved myself. Someone hadto. I rewarded myself with thoughts of her, mid-ecstasy, andconsidered the impersonal quality of her pleasures. I was onlygood enough for her, as many men might be. I refused the obvious, that her distance was the whip that drove my longing. Buthere was something strange. Three days before, she had askeda mysterious question. We were mid-embrace, in the conventional position. She drew my face towards hers. Her look wasserious.

She whispered, "Tell me something. Are you real?"

I didn't reply.

She turned her head away so that I saw her in profile as hereyes closed and she lost herself once more in a maze of privatepleasure.

Later that night, I asked her about it. "It was nothing,"was all she said before she changed the subject. Was I real?Meaning did I really love her, or was I honest, or did I fit herneeds so exactly that she might have dreamed me up?

I crossed the kitchen to pour the last of the wine. The broken fridge door handle needed a sharp sideways pull to engageits lock. As my hand closed round the cold neck of the bottle, Iheard a sound, a creak above my head. I had lived long enoughbeneath Miranda's feet to know her steps and their precisedirection. She had moved across her bedroom and was hesitating in the threshold of her kitchen. I heard the murmur ofher voice. No reply. She took another two steps into the room.The next would bring her onto a floorboard that under pressure made a truncated quacking sound. As I waited to hear it,Adam spoke. He pushed his chair back as he stood. If he wasto take another step he would need to untether himself. Thishe must have achieved because it was his tread that landedon the noisy floorboard. That meant they were standing lessthan a metre apart, but there was no sound until a minutehad passed, and now it was footsteps, two sets, moving backtowards the bedroom.

I left the fridge door open because the sound of it closingwould betray me. No choice but to shadow them into my bedroom. So I went and stood by my desk and listened. I reckonedI was right under her bed when I heard the murmur of hervoice, a command. She must have wanted air in the room, forAdam's steps tracked across the room towards the Victorianbay. Only one of its three windows opened. Even that one washard to shift on a warm or rainy day. The old wooden framesshrank or expanded, and something was wrong with the counterweight and hardened rope. Our age could devise a passablereplica of a human mind, but there was no one in our neighbourhood to fix a sash window, though a few had tried.And how was my mind as I stood directly below, in anidentical bay, reproduced by the thousands in late-Victorianindustrial-scale developments? They had spilled across thefive-acre fields of hedgerow and boundary oaks that adornedthe southern limits of London. Not good--my mind, that is.Embodied, it told all. Shivering, moist, especially on the palms,raised pulse, in a state of elated anticipation. Fear, self-doubt,fury. In my bay, old fitted carpet, stained and worn since themid-fifties, extended right to the skirting boards. In Miranda's, the carpet gave way to bare boards that, two world warsback, must have been polished to a nut-brown gleam. Somepoor girl in white apron and mob cap, on all fours, waxed clothin hand, never could have dreamed of the kind of being whowould one day stand in the place where she crouched. I heardhim plant his feet on the old wood, I imagined him stooping togrip the window by the metal fixtures on its lower frame andheave upwards with the strength of four young men. Therewas a silence of straining resistance before the entire windowshot upwards and hit the top casing with a rifle crack and ashattering of glass. My snort of delight could have given meaway.

No shortage now of marginally cooler air filling theroom. My glee faded as Adam's footsteps returned to whereMiranda waited by the bed. As he went towards her, it mighthave been an apology that he muttered. Here was the soundof her forgiving him, for her brief sentence was followed bythe entwined mezzo and tenor of their laughter. I had trailedafter Adam and was once more by the bed, six feet under. Hehad the manual skills to undress her and he was undressingher now. What else would occupy their silence? 1 knewcourse I knew--that her mattress made no sound. Futons,with their Japanese promise of a clean and simple life ofstripped-back clarity, were the fashion then. And I myself feltwashed in clarity, senses cleansed as I stood in the dark andwaited. I could have run up the stairs and prevented them,burst into the bedroom like the clownish husband in an oldseaside postcard. But my situation had a thrilling aspect, notonly of subterfuge and discovery, but of originality, of modernprecedence, of being the first to be cuckolded by an artefact. Iwas of my times, riding the breaking crest of the new, aheadof everyone in enacting that drama of displacement so fre quently and gloomily predicted. Another element of my passivity: even at this earliest moment, I knew I had brought thewhole thing down on myself. But that was for later. For now,despite the horror of betrayal, it was all too interesting and Icouldn't stir from my role of eavesdropper, the blind voyeur,humiliated and alert.

It was my mind's eyes, or my heart's, that watched asAdam and Miranda lay down on the unyielding embrace ofthe futon and found the comfortable posture for a clasp oflimbs. I watched as she whispered in his ear, but I didn't hearthe words. She had never whispered in my ear at such times.I saw him kiss her--longer and deeper than I had ever kissedher. The arms that heaved up the window frame were tightlyaround her. Minutes later I almost looked away as he kneltwith reverence to pleasure her with his tongue. This was thecelebrated tongue, wet and breathily warm, adept at uvularsand labials, that gave his speech its authenticity. I watched,surprised by nothing. He didn't fully satisfy my beloved then,as I would have, but left her arching her slender back, eagerfor him as he arranged himself above her with smooth, slowloris formality, at which point my humiliation was complete.I saw it all in the dark--men would be obsolete. I wanted topersuade myself that Adam felt nothing and could only imitate the motions of abandonment. That he could never knowwhat we knew. But Alan Turing himself had often said andwritten in his youth that the moment we couldn't tell the difference in behaviour between machine and person was whenwe must confer humanity on the machine. So when the nightair was suddenly penetrated by Miranda's extended ecstaticscream that tapered to a moan and then a stifled sob--all thisI actually heard twenty minutes after the shattering of thewindow--I duly laid on Adam the privilege and obligations ofa conspecific. I hated him.

Early the following morning, for the first time in years, Itipped into my coffee a heaped spoon of sugar. I watched theconfined, nut-brown disc of fluid turn, then slow, in its clockwise motion, then lose all purpose in a chaotic swirl. Tempting,but I resisted a metaphor for my own existence. 1 was trying tothink and it was barely seven thirty. Soon Adam or Mirandaor both would appear at my door. I wanted my thoughts andattitude in coherent form. After a night of broken sleep, I wasdepressed as well as angry with myself, and determined notto appear so. Miranda had kept her distance from me and so,by contemporary standards, a night with someone else, evensomething else, was not quite a betrayal. As for the ethicaldimensions of Adam's behaviour, here was a history with acurious beginning. It was during the miners' strike of twelveyears before that self-driving cars first appeared on experi mental sites, mostly disused airfields, where movie set designers had constructed imitation streets, motorway junctions andvarious hazards.

"Autonomous" was never the right word, for the new carswere as dependent as newborn babies on mighty networks ofcomputers linked to satellites and on-board radar. If artificialintelligence was to guide these vehicles safely home, whatset of values or priorities should be assumed in the software?Fortunately, in moral philosophy there already existed a wellexplored set of dilemmas known in the business as "the trolleyproblem." Adapted easily to cars, the sort of problem manufacturers and their software engineers now posed was this:you, or rather, your car is driving at the maximum legal speedalong a narrow suburban road. The traffic is flowing nicely.On the pavement on your side of the road is a group of children. Suddenly one of them, a child of eight, runs out acrossthe road, right into your path. There's a fraction of a second tomake a decision--either mow the child down or swerve ontothe crowded pavement or into the oncoming traffic and collidehead on with a truck at a closing speed of eighty miles an hour.You're alone, so that's fine, sacrifice or save yourself. What ifyour spouse and your two children are in the car? Too easy?What if it's your only daughter, or your grandparents, or yourpregnant daughter and your son-in-law, both in their midtwenties? Now take into account the occupants of the truck. Afraction of a second is more than enough time for a computerto give thorough consideration to all the issues. The decisionwill depend on the priorities ordered by the software.While mounted policemen charged at miners, and manufacturing towns across the country began their long, saddescent in the cause of free markets, the subject of robot ethics was born. The international automobile industry consultedphilosophers, judges, specialists in medical ethics, game theorists and parliamentary committees. Then, in universities andresearch institutes, the subject expanded on its own. Longbefore the hardware was available, professors and their postdocs devised software that conjured our best selves--tolerant,open-minded, considerate, free of all taint of scheming, maliceor prejudice. Theorists anticipated a refined artificial intelligence, guided by well-designed principles, that would learn byroaming over thousands, millions, of moral dilemmas. Suchintelligence could teach us how to be, how to be good. Humanswere ethically flawed--inconsistent, emotionally labile, proneto biases, to errors in cognition, many of which were selfserving. Long before there was even a suitable lightweightbattery to power an artificial human, or the elastic material to provide for its face a set of recognisable expressions,the software existed to make it decent and wise. Before wehad constructed a robot that could bend and tie an old man'sshoelace for him, there was hope that our own creations wouldredeem us.

The life of the self-driving car was short, at least in itsfirst manifestation, and its moral qualities were never reallyput to the test over time. Nothing proved more vividly themaxim that technology renders civilisation fragile than thegreat traffic paralyses of the late seventies. By then, autonomous vehicles comprised seventeen per cent of the total. Whocan forget that roasting rush-hour evening of the ManhattanLogjam? Due to an exceptional solar pulse, many on-boardradars failed at once. Streets and avenues, bridges and tunnelswere blocked and took days to untangle. Nine months later,the similar Ruhr Jam in northern Europe caused a short economic downturn and prompted conspiracy theories. Teenagehackers with a lust for mayhem? Or an aggressive, disordered,faraway nation with advanced hacking skills? Or, my favourite, an unreconstructed automobile maker loathing the hotbreath of the new? Apart from our too-busy sun, no culpritwas ever found.

The world's religions and great literatures demonstratedclearly that we knew how to be good. We set out our aspirationsin poetry, prose and song, and we knew what to do. The problem was in the enactment, consistently and en masse. Whatsurvived the temporary death of the autonomous car was adream of redemptive robotic virtue. Adam and his cohort wereits early embodiment, so the user's manual implied. He wassupposed to be my moral superior. I would never meet anyonebetter. Had he been my friend, he would have been guilty ofa cruel and terrible lapse. The problem was that I had boughthim, he was my expensive possession and it was not clear whathis obligations to me were, beyond a vaguely assumed helpfulness. What does the slave owe to the owner? Also, Miranda didnot "belong" to me. This was clear. I could hear her tell methat I had no good cause to feel betrayed.

But here was this other matter, which she and I had not yetdiscussed. Software engineers from the automobile industrymay have helped with Adam's moral maps. But together wehad contributed to his personality. I didn't know the extent towhich it intruded on, or took priority over, his ethics. How deepdid personality go? A perfectly formed moral system shouldfloat free of any particular disposition. But could it? Confinedto a hard drive, moral software was merely the dry equivalentof the brain-in-a-dish thought experiment that once litteredphilosophical textbooks. Whereas an artificial human had toget down among us, imperfect, fallen us, and rub along. Handsassembled in sterile factory conditions must get dirty. To existin the human moral dimension was to own a body, a voice,a pattern of behaviour, memory and desire, experience solidthings and feel pain. A perfectly honest being engaged in sucha way with the world might find Miranda difficult to resist.Through the night, I'd fantasised Adam's destruction. I sawmy hands tighten around the rope I used to drag him towardsthe filthy River Wandle. If only he hadn't cost me so much.Now he was costing me more. His moment with Mirandacouldn't have been a struggle between principle and the pursuit of pleasure. His erotic life was a simulacrum. He cared forher as a dishwasher cares for its dishes. He, or his sub-routines,preferred her approval to my wrath. I also blamed Miranda,who had ticked half the boxes and settled many intricacies ofhis nature. And for setting her on, I blamed myself. I'd wantedto "discover" Adam in just the way I might a new friend, andhere he was, a self-declared cad. I'd wanted to bind myselfcloser to Miranda in the process. Well, I had been thinkingabout her all night. It was success all round.

I heard footsteps on the stairs. Two sets. I drew yesterday'snewspaper and my cup towards me and prepared to appearcasually absorbed. I had my dignity to protect. Miranda's keyturned in the lock. As she preceded Adam into the kitchen,I looked up as though reluctant to be drawn away from myreading. I had just learned from the front page that the firstpermanent artificial heart had been installed in a man calledBarney Clark.

It pained me that she seemed different, refreshed, newlyarranged. It was another warm day. She wore a flimsy pleatedskirt formed of two layers of white cheesecloth. As she cametowards me, the material brushed a line several inches aboveher bare knees. No socks, canvas plimsolls of the sort we usedto wear at school, and a cotton blouse buttoned chastely to thetop. There was mockery in all this white. Behind the crownof her head was a clasp I'd never seen before, an ornamentin bright red plastic, showily cheap. Inconceivable, that Adamcould have slipped out of the house to buy it for her at Simon'swith coins taken from the papier-mache bowl in the kitchen.But I conceived it, and experienced a hot jolt which I concealedbehind a smile. I was not going to appear crushed.

Adam had partly hidden himself behind her. Now, whenshe stopped, he was at her side, but he wouldn't look directlyat me. Miranda, however, appeared cheerful, with the amusedpout of someone about to deliver important good news. Thekitchen table was between us and they stood before me whereI sat, like candidates for a job. At any other time I would havestood to embrace her, offered to make her coffee. She was amorning addict and liked it strong. Instead, I cocked my head,met her gaze and waited. Of course, she was dressed for tennis,the ball was in her--ah, how I hated my own stupid thoughts.I couldn't imagine any good coming from a conversation withthese two. Far better to contemplate Barney's luck with hisnew heart.

She said to Adam, "Why don't you . . ." She indicatedhis usual chair, and drew it back for him. He sat promptly.We watched as he loosened his belt, took the power lead andplugged himself in. Of course he would be much depleted.She reached across his shoulder for the place on his nape andpressed. It was clearly by agreement. As soon as his eyes closed,his head slumped, and we were alone.

iranda went to the stove and prepared coffee. Whileher back was still turned she said gaily, "Charlie.

You're being ridiculous."

"Am I?"

"Hostile."

"So?"

She brought two cups and a jug of milk to the table. Shewas swift and loose in her movements. If I hadn't been thereshe might have been singing to herself. There was a scent oflemon about her hands. I thought she was about to touch myshoulder and I tensed, but she moved away again to the otherside of the room. After a moment she said with some delicacy,"You heard us last night."

"I heard you."

"And you're upset."

I didn't reply.

"You shouldn't be."

I shrugged.

She said, "If I'd gone to bed with a vibrator would you befeeling the same?"

"He's not a vibrator."

She brought the coffee to the table and sat down close tome. She was being kindly, concerned, in effect casting meas the sulking child, trying to make me forget that she wasten years my junior. What was passing between us was ourmost intimate exchange so far. Hostile? She had never beforereferred to any mood-state of mine.

She said, "He has as much consciousness as one."

den. He looks like a man. Another man."

"Vibrators don't have opinions. They don't weed the gar"D'you know, when he has an erection--""I don't want to hear about it."

"He told me. His cock fills with distilled water. From areservoir in his right buttock."

This was comforting but I was determined to be cool.

"That's what all men say."

She laughed. I had never seen her so light and free. "I'mtrying to remind you. He's a fucking machine."

A fucking machine.

"It was gross, Miranda. If I humped an inflatable sex dollyou'd feel the same."

"I wouldn't get tragic about it. I wouldn't think you werehaving an affair."

"But you are. It'll happen again." I hadn't intended to concede that possibility. It was a rhetorical parry, a cue for her tocontradict me. But I was somewhat provoked by "tragic."I said, "If I was ripping a sex doll apart with a knife, you'dbe right to be worried."

"I don't see the connection."

"The issue isn't Adam's state of mind. It's yours."

"Oh, in that case . . ." She turned towards Adam, liftedhis lifeless hand an inch or so above the table and let it drop."Suppose I told you that I love him. My ideal man. Brilliantlover, textbook technique, inexhaustible. Never hurt by any thing I say or do. Considerate, obedient even, and knowledgeable, good conversation. Strong as a dray horse. Great with thehousework. His breath smells like the back of a warm TV set,but I can live with--""OK. Enough."

Her sarcasm, a novel register, was delivered with muchvariation of pitch. I thought the performance was mean inspirit. For all I knew, she was hiding the truth in plain sight. Shepatted Adam's wrist as she smiled at me. In triumph or by wayof apology, I couldn't tell. I was bound to suspect that a nightof exceptional sex was the cause of this taunting, airy-headedmanner. She was harder than ever to read. I wondered if I couldbreak with her completely. Take back Adam as my own, retrievethe spare charging cable from upstairs, restore Miranda to herrole as neighbour and friend, distant friend. In the manner ofthought, the idea was no more than a spark of irritation. Thenotion that immediately followed was that I could never be freeof her and would never want to be--most of the time. Here shewas beside me, close enough for me to feel her summer-morningbody warmth. Beautiful, pale-skinned, smooth, in bridal white,gazing on me again with affectionate concern now that herteasing was done. The look was new. It could be--this was anencouraging thought--that a clever device had performed aservice, loosening Miranda's warmer feelings.

Arguing with the person you love is its own peculiar torment. The self divides against itself. Love slugs it out withits Freudian opposite. And if death wins and love dies, whogives a damn? You do, which enrages you and makes you morereckless yet. There's intrinsic exhaustion too. Both know, orthink they know, that a reconciliation must happen, thoughit could take days, even weeks. The moment, when it comes,will be sweet and promises great tenderness and ecstasy. Sowhy not make up now, take the shortcut, spare yourselves theeffortful rage? Neither of you can. You're on a slide, you've lostcontrol of your feelings, and of your future too. The effort willbe compounded so that eventually every unkind word must beunsaid at five times cost. Reciprocally, extending forgivenesswill require a feat of selfless concentration.

It was a long while since I'd indulged such irresistiblefolly. Miranda and I were not yet rowing, we were parrying,getting close, and I would be the one to get us started. Withall this tactical coolness and her sarcasm and now her friendlyconcern, I felt bottled up. I badly wanted to shout. Atavisticmasculinity urged it. My faithless lover, brazen, with anotherman, within my hearing. It should have been simple. It wasn'tmy origins, social or geographical, that held me back. Onlymodern logic. Perhaps she was right, Adam didn't qualify, hewasn't a man. Persona non grata. He was a bipedal vibrator andI was the very latest in cuckolds. To justify my rage I neededto convince myself that he had agency, motivation, subjective feelings, self-awareness---the entire package, includingtreachery, betrayal, deviousness. Machine consciousness--wasit possible? That old question. I opted for Alan Turing's protocol. Its beauty and simplicity never appealed to me more thanit did now. The Master came to my rescue.

"Listen," I said. "If he looks and sounds and behaves like aperson, then as far as I'm concerned, that's what he is. I makethe same assumption about you. About everybody. We all do.You fucked him. I'm angry. I'm amazed you're surprised. Ifthat's what you really are."

Saying the word "angry" made me raise my voice in anger.I felt a surge of exquisite release. We were getting started.But she clung for the moment to a defensive mode. "I wascurious," she said. "I wanted to know what it would be like."Curiosity, the forbidden fruit, condemned by God, andMarcus Aurelius, and St. Augustine.

"There must be hundreds of men you're curious about."

That did it. I had crossed the line. She pushed her chairback with a noisy scrape. Her pallor darkened. Her pulse wasup. I had got what I ridiculously wanted.

She said, "You were keen on an Eve. Why was that? Whatwere you wanting with an Eve? Tell the truth, Charlie.""I wasn't bothered either way."

"You were disappointed. You should've let Adam fuck you.I could see you wanted it. But you're too uptight."

It had taken all of my twenties to learn from women combatants that in a full-on row it was not necessary to respond tothe last thing said. Generally it was best not to. In an attacking move, ignore bishop or castle. Logic and straight lineswere out. Best to rely on the knight.

I said, "It must have occurred to you last night, lyingunder a plastic robot, screaming your head off, that it's thehuman factor you hate."

She said, "You just told me he's human."

"But you think he's a dildo. Nothing too complicated.

That's what turns you on."

She knew a knight's move too. "You fancy yourself as alover."

I waited.

"You're a narcissist. You think making a woman come isan achievement. Your achievement."

"With you it is." That was nonsense.

She was standing now. "I've seen you in the bathroom.

Adoring yourself in the mirror."

An excusable error. My days sometimes began with anunspoken soliloquy. A matter of seconds, usually after shaving. I dried my face, looked myself in the eye, listed failings,the usual: money, living quarters, no serious work and, lately,Miranda--lack of progress, now this. I also set myself tasks forthe day ahead, trivial stuff, embarrassing to relate. Take outthe rubbish. Drink less. Get a haircut. Get out of commodities.I never thought I'd been observed. A bathroom door, hers ormine, could have been ajar. Perhaps my lips were moving.But this was not the time to set Miranda straight. Acrossfrom us sat comatose Adam. Glancing at him now, at the muscular forearms, the steep angle of his nose, and feeling a prickof resentment, I remembered. As I said the words, I knew Icould be making an important mistake.

"Remind me what the Salisbury judge said."

It worked. Her face went slack as she turned away from meand returned to the other side of the kitchen. Half a minutepassed. She was by the cooker, staring into the corner, worrying something in her hand, a corkscrew, a cork or a flap ofwine-bottle foil. As the silence went on, I was looking at theline of her shoulders, wondering if she was crying, whether, inmy ignorance, I'd gone too far. But when she turned at last tolook at me she was composed, her face was dry.

"How do you know about that?"

I nodded towards Adam.

She took this in and then she said, "I don't understand."Her voice was small.

"He has all kinds of access."

"Oh God."

I added, "He's probably looked me up too."

With this, the row collapsed in on itself, without reconciliation or estrangement. Now we were united against Adam. Butthat wasn't my immediate concern. The delicate trick was toappear to know a lot in order to find out something, anything.I said, "You could call it curiosity on Adam's part. Orregard it as some kind of algorithm."

"What's the difference?"

Turing's point precisely. But I said nothing.

"If he's going to tell people," she went on. "That's whatmatters."

"He's only told me."

The object in her hand was a teaspoon. She rolled it restlessly, worked it between her fingers, transferred it to her leftand began again, then handed it back. She wasn't aware ofwhat she was doing. It was unpleasant to watch. How mucheasier it would have been if I didn't love her. Then I couldhave been alive to her needs instead of calculating my own aswell. I had to know what had happened in court, then understand, embrace, support, forgive--whatever was required.Self-interest dressed as kindness. But it was also kindness. Myfraudulent voice sounded thin in my ears.

"I don't know your side of it."

She came back to the table and sat heavily. She saidthrough a clotted throat she wouldn't make the effort to clear,"No one does." At last she looked at me directly. There wasnothing sorrowful or needy in her gaze. Her eyes were hardwith stubborn defiance.

I said gently, "You could tell me."

"You know enough."

"Is going to the mosque something to do with it?"

She gave me a look of pity and faintly shook her head."Adam read me the judge's summing-up," I lied again asI remembered that he had told me she was the liar. Malicious.Her elbows were on the table, her hands partly obscuredher mouth. She was looking away towards the window.

I blundered on. "You can trust me."

At last she cleared her throat. "None of it was true.""I see."

"Oh God," she said again. "Why was Adam telling you?"

"I don't know. But I know this is on your mind all the time.I want to help you."

This was when she should have put her hand in mine andstand? He's still in prison."

"Yes."

"Another three months. Then he's out."

"Yes."

told me everything. Instead, she was bitter. "Don't you underShe raised her voice. "So how are you going to help withthat?"

"I'll do my best."

thing?"

I waited.

"I hate you."

"Miranda. Come on."

She sighed. Her voice went quiet. "Do you know some"I didn't want you or your special friend knowingabout me."

I reached for her hand but she moved it away. I said, "Iunderstand. But now I know and it doesn't change my feelings.I'm on your side."

She sprang up from the table. "It changes my feelings. It'sdisgusting. It's disgusting that you know this about me.""Not to me it isn't."

"Not to me it isn't."

Her parody was savage, catching too well the meagretone of my deception. Now she was looking at me differently.She was about to say something else. But just at that moment,out my noticing.

Adam opened his eyes. She must have powered him up withShe said, "OK. Here's something you didn't get from thepress. I was in Salisbury last month. Someone came to thedoor, a wiry guy with missing teeth. He had a message. WhenPeter Gorringe gets out in three months."

"Yes?"

"He's promised to kill me."

In moments of stress, and fear is little else, a timid musclein my right eyelid goes into spasm. I cupped a hand over mybrow in an attitude of concentration, even though I knew thewrithing beneath the skin was invisible to others.

She added, "It was his cellmate. He said Gorringe wasserious."

"Right."

She was snappish. "Meaning what?"

"You'd better take him seriously."

You, not we--I saw in her blink and fractional recoil howshe took this in. My phrasing was deliberate. I'd offered helpseveral times and been brushed off, even mocked. Now I sawjust how much help she needed, I held back and let her ask forit. Perhaps she wouldn't. I conjured this Gorringe, a large type,stepping from the prison gym, adept in forms of industrialviolence. A tamping iron, a meat hook, a boiler wrench.Adam was looking at me intently as he listened toMiranda. In effect, she was asking for my assistance as shewent on to describe her frustrations. The police were reluctantto act against a crime not yet committed. She had no proof.Gorringe's threat had been merely verbal, made through anintermediary. She persisted, and finally an officer agreed tointerview him. The prison was north of Manchester and themeeting took a month to arrange. Peter Gorringe, relaxedand cheerful, charmed the police sergeant. It was a joke, hehad said, this talk of killing. Merely a manner of speaking, asin--this was in the policeman's notes--"I'd kill for a chickenmadras." He may have said something in front of his cellmate,a none-too-bright fellow, now released. This fellow must havebeen passing through Salisbury and thought he'd deliver themessage. He was always a little bit vindictive. The policemanwrote all this down, delivered a caution, and the two men,chester City, parted after a handshake.

finding common ground in their lifelong support for ManI listened as best I could. Anxiety is a great diluter ofattention. Adam listened too, nodding sagely, as if he'd notbeen powered down this past hour and understood everything already. Miranda's mood-tone, to which I was so closelyattuned, was lightly tinged with indignation, now directed atthe authorities rather than me. Not believing anything Gorringe had told the detective sergeant, she'd been to the weeklysurgery of our Clapham MP--Labour, of course, a tough oldbird, union organiser, scourge of the bankers. She directedMiranda back to the police. Her prospective murder was not aconstituency matter.

After this account, a silence. I was preoccupied by theobvious question my own deceit prevented me from asking.What had she done to deserve a death?

Adam said, "Does Gorringe know this address?"

"He can easily find out."

"Have you ever seen or heard of him being violent?"

"Oh yes."

"Could he simply be trying to frighten you?"

"It's possible."

"Is he capable of murder?"

"He's very, very angry."

She responded to these plodding questions as thoughthey came from a real person, an investigating detective, not"a fucking machine." Since Adam didn't ask, it was clear healready knew what Miranda had done, what monstrous act, toprovoke Gorringe. None of this was Adam's business and I waswondering about his kill switch. I wanted more coffee, but Ifelt too weary to get up from my chair to make it.

Then we heard footsteps along the narrow path betweenthe houses that leads to the shared front door. Too late for thepostman, far too soon for Gorringe. We heard a man's voicegiving what sounded like instructions. Then the bell rang andfootsteps receded rapidly. I looked at Miranda, she looked atme and shrugged. It was my bell. She wasn't going.

I turned to Adam. "Please."

He rose immediately and went into the tiny crowded hallwhere coats hung between the gas and electricity meters. Welistened as he turned the door latch. Seconds later the frontdoor closed.

Adam came into the room leading by the hand a child, avery small boy. He wore dirty shorts and t-shirt and pink plastic sandals a couple of sizes too large. His legs and feet werefilthy. In his free hand was a brown envelope. He clung toAdam's hand, in fact to his forefinger. He was looking steadilyfrom Miranda to me. By this time we were both standing.Adam prised from the child's fist the envelope and passed it tome. It was as soft and limp as suede from much use and hadsome additions and crossings-out on it in pencil. Inside wasthe card I'd given to the boy's father. On the back was a note inthick black upper-case letters. "You wanted him."

I passed it to Miranda and looked back at the boy, then Iremembered his name.

I said in the kindliest way, "Hello, Mark. How did you gethere?"

By this time Miranda, making a soft, sympathetic sound,was going towards him. But he was no longer looking in ourdirection. Instead, he was gazing up at Adam, whose finger hestill gripped.

He might have been in shock, but the little boy showedno outward signs of distress. He would have been better offcrying, for he gave an impression of inner struggle. He stoodamong strangers in the alien kitchen, shoulders back, chestout, trying to be large and brave. At just over a metre high,he was doing his best. His sandals suggested an older sister.Where was she? I had told Miranda about the encounter inthe swing park and she had understood the note. She triedto put her arms round Mark's shoulders but he shrugged heroff. It was possible he'd never been taught the luxury of beingcomforted. Adam stood still and upright and the boy kept firmhold of the reassuring finger.

Miranda knelt down in front of him, levelling with him,determined not to condescend. "Mark, you're with friends andyou're going to be fine," she said soothingly.

Adam knew nothing at first hand about children, buteverything that could be known was available to him. Hewaited for Miranda, then he said in an unforced tone, "So,what shall we have for breakfast?"

Mark spoke to no one in particular. "Toast."

That was a fortunate choice. I crossed the kitchen, relievedto have something to do. Miranda also wanted to make thetoast and we fumbled around together in a small space without touching. I sliced the bread, she brought out the butter andfound a plate.

"And juice?" Miranda said.

"Milk." The small voice was immediate, assertive in itsway, and we felt reassured.

Miranda poured milk, but into a wine glass, the only cleanvessel available. When she presented it to Mark he lookedaway. I rinsed out a coffee mug, Miranda decanted the drinkand presented it again. He took it in two hands but wouldn'tbe led to the table. Watched by us, he stood alone in the centreof the kitchen, eyes closed, and drank, then set the mug downat his feet.

I said, "Mark, would you like butter? Marmalade? Peanutbutter?"

The boy shook his head, as though each offer was an itemof sad news.

"Just toast on its own?" I cut it into four pieces. He tookthem off the plate and gripped them in his fist and ate themmethodically, letting the crusts fall to his feet. It was an interesting face. Very pale, plump, unblemished skin, green eyes, abright rosebud of a mouth. The ginger-blond hair was buzz-cutnent look.

"Now what?" Adam said.

"Wee."

close to the scalp, which gave his long, delicate ears a promiMark followed me along the narrow corridor and into thelavatory. I lifted the seat and helped him pull his shorts down.He had no underwear. He was competent with his aim, andhis bladder was capacious, for the tiny stream lasted a while. Itried to make conversation while he tinkled away.

"Would you like a story, Mark? Shall we look for a picturebook?" I suspected I didn't have one.

He didn't reply.

It had been a long time since I'd seen a penis so minus cule, so dedicated to one uncomplicated task. His defencelessness seemed complete. When I helped him wash his hands, heappeared familiar with the routine, but he refused the toweland dodged out into the corridor.

Back in the kitchen it looked cheerful. While Miranda andAdam cleared up, flamenco music was playing on the radio.The newcomer had delivered us into the mundane as well asthe momentous, into unbuttered toast as well as the shock of arejected existence. Our own scattered concerns--a betrayal, adisputed claim to consciousness, a death threat--were trivial.With the little boy among us it was important to clean up,impose order, and only then reflect.

The scintillating guitar soon gave way to shambolicand frenzied orchestral music. I snapped it off and into themomentary bliss of silence that followed Adam said, "One ofyou should now be in touch with the authorities."

"Soon," Miranda said. "Not yet."

"Otherwise the legal situation could be difficult."

"Yes," she said. She meant no.

"The parents might not be of the same mind. The mothercould be looking for him."

He waited for a reply. Miranda was sweeping the floor andhad made a small heap, which included Mark's crusts, by thecooker. Now she knelt to gather the detritus into a dustpan.She said quietly, "Charlie told me. The mother's a wreck.She smacks him."

Adam continued. He made his points with delicacy, like alawyer giving unwelcome advice to a client he couldn't affordto lose.

"Granted, but that might not be relevant. Mark probably loves her. And from a legal perspective, in the case of aminor, there comes a point when your hospitality shades intowrongdoing."

"Fine with me."

Mark had gone to stand by Adam's side and held the fabricof his jeans between forefinger and thumb.

Adam lowered his voice for the boy's benefit. "If you don'tmind, allow me to read to you from the Child Abduction Actof 19--"With great force, Miranda struck the edge of the tin dustpan against the rim of the pedal dustbin to empty out thesweepings. I was polishing glasses, not minding a rift betweenmy lover and her paramour. The fucking machine was talking sense. Miranda was driven by something other than sense.Perhaps it was beyond Adam to understand her, or to interpret the noise she had made with the dustpan. I listened andwatched and dried the glasses and placed them on their shelfin the cupboard, where they had not been in a long time.Adam continued in his cautious manner.

"A key word in the Act, along with 'abduct,' is 'retain.' Thepolice may already be out looking for him. May I--""Adam. That's enough."

"You might like to hear about some relevant cases. In1969, a Liverpool woman passing an all-night garage cameacross a little girl who--"She had gone to where he stood and for an impossiblemoment I thought she was going to hit him. She spoke firmlyinto his face, separating out the words. "I don't want or needyour advice. Thank you!"

Mark began to cry. Before there was a sound, his rosebud stretched to a downturn. A prolonged falling moan, asof rebuke, was followed by a clucking sound as his collapsedlungs fought for an intake of breath. The inhalation that preceded his wail was also prolonged. The tears were instant.Miranda made a comforting sound and put a hand on the boy'sarm. It was not the right move. The wail rose to a siren shriek.In other circumstances, we might have run from the room toan assembly point. When Adam glanced across at me, I gavea helpless shrug. Mark surely needed his mother. But Adampicked the boy up and settled him on his hip and the cryingstopped in seconds. In the gulping aftermath, the little boystared glassily out at us through spiked eyelashes from a highposition. He announced in a clear voice, free of petulance, "Iwant to have a bath. With a boat."

He had spoken a whole sentence at last and we wererelieved. It was an irresistible request. More so with the oldboundary markers of class--barf and wiv, and glottal t's. Wewould give him everything he wanted. But what boat?

A competition was forming for Mark's affections.

"Come on then," Miranda said in a lilting, maternal voice.She stretched out her arms to gather him up but he shrankfrom her and pressed his face into Adam's chest. Adam lookedrigidly ahead, as she called with face-saving cheeriness,"Let's run the bath," and led them out and along the corridor to my unappealing bathroom. Seconds later, the rumbleof running taps.

I was surprised to find myself alone, as if I had taken forgranted a fifth presence in the room, someone I could turnto now to talk about the morning and its parade of emotions.There were fresh cries of distress from the bathroom. Adamhurried back into the kitchen, seized a cereal packet, liftedout its bag, ripped the box apart, flattened it, and in blurredseconds, using some technique he must have copied from aJapanese website, fashioned an origami boat, a barque with aing subsided. The boat was launched.

single, billowing mainsail. Then he hurried out and the wailI sat at the table in a stupor, aware that I should get to myscreen and earn some money. The month's rent was due andthere was less than PS40 in the bank. I had shares in a Brazilian rare earth mining company and this could be the day tosell. But I couldn't motivate myself. I was subject to occasionaldepression, relatively mild, certainly not suicidal, and not longepisodes so much as passing moments like this, when meaningand purpose and all prospect of pleasure drained away and leftme briefly catatonic. For minutes on end I couldn't remember what kept me going. As I stared at the litter of cups andpot and jug in front of me, I thought it was unlikely I wouldever get out of my wretched little flat. The two boxes I calledrooms, the stained ceilings, walls and floors, would contain meto the end. There were a lot like me in the neighbourhood, butthirty or forty years older. I had seen them in Simon's shop,reaching for the quality journals from the top shelf. I notedthe men especially and their shabby clothes. They had sweptpast some critical junction in their lives many years back--apoor career choice, a bad marriage, the unwritten book, theillness that never went away. Now their options were closed,they managed to keep themselves going with some shred ofintellectual longing or curiosity. But their boat was sunk.Mark walked in, barefoot and wearing what looked likean ankle-length gown. It was one of my t-shirts and it had aneffect on him. Holding out the cotton material in each handat his waist, he started to run up and down the kitchen, thenin circles, and then made clumsy pirouettes in order to spinhis gown out around him. The attempts made him stagger.Miranda came through the kitchen with his dirty clothes andtook them upstairs to her washing machine. Her way, perhaps,of keeping him here. I sat with my head in my hands, watching Mark, who kept looking in my direction to check that Iwas impressed by his antics. But I was distracted, only awareof him because he was the only moving object in the room. Igave him no encouragement. I was waiting for Adam.

When he appeared in the doorway I said, "Sit down here."As he lowered himself onto a chair opposite me there wasa muffled click, such as children make when they pull theirfingers. A low-level malfunction. Mark continued to pranceabout the kitchen.

I said, "Why would this Gorringe want to harm Miranda?And don't hold back."

I needed to understand this machine. There was alreadyone particular feature I'd observed. Whenever Adam faced achoice of responses, his face froze for an instant that was fractionally above the horizon of perception. It did so now, barelya shimmer, but I saw it. Thousands of possibilities must havebeen sifted, assigned a value, a utility function and a moralweighting.

"Harm? He intends to kill her."

"Why?"

The manufacturers were wrong to believe that they couldimpress me with a soulful sigh and the motorised movementof a head as Adam looked away. I still doubted that he could,in any real sense, even look.

He said, "She accused him of a crime. He denied it. Thecourt believed her. Others didn't."

I was about to ask more when Adam glanced up. I turnedin my chair. Miranda was already in the kitchen and she hadheard what Adam said. Instantly she began to clap her handsand whoop to the little boy's capers. Stepping in his path, shetook his hands in hers and they whirled in circles. His feet leftthe ground and he screamed in delight as she spun him round.He shouted for more. But now she linked arms with him andshowed him how to turn about, ceilidh-style, and stamp on thefloor. He copied her movements, placing his free hand on hiship and waving the other wildly in the air. His arm did notextend much above his head.

The jig became a reel, then a stumbling waltz. My momentof depression dissolved. Watching Miranda's supple back bendlow to make a partner of a four-year-old, I remembered howI loved her. When Mark squealed with pleasure, she imitatedhim. When she sang out on a high note, he tried to reach forit too. I watched and clapped along, but I was also aware ofAdam. He was completely still, and still without expression,looking not so much at the dancers as through them. It washis turn to be the cuckold, for he was no longer the boy's bestfriend. She had stolen him away. Adam must have realisedthat she was punishing him for his indiscretion. A courtroomaccusation? I had to know more.

Mark's gaze never left Miranda's face. He was entranced.Now she picked him up and cradled him as she danced aroundthe room, singing "Hey diddle-diddle, the cat and the fiddle."I wondered if Adam had the capacity to understand the joy ofdance, of movement for its own sake, and whether Mirandawas showing him a line he couldn't cross. If so, she may havebeen wrong. Adam could imitate and respond to emotionsand appear to take pleasure in reasoning. He might also haveknown something of the purposeless beauty of art. She setMark down, took his hands again in hers, this time with armscrossed. They circled stealthily, with undulating, ripplingmovements as she chanted, to his delight, "If you go down inthe woods today, You're sure of a big surprise . .

Hours later, I discovered that during this kitchen rompAdam was in direct contact with the authorities. It wasn'tunreasonable of him, but he did it without telling us. And soit was that after the dancing and a glass of iced apple juice inthe garden, after the clean clothes had been ironed and put on,and the pink sandals scrubbed under the tap, dried and fittedround the tiny feet, whose nails were freshly trimmed, afterthe lunch of scrambled eggs and a session of nursery rhymes,there came the ring on the doorbell.

Two Asian women in black headscarves--they could havebeen mother and daughter--apologetic but professionallyfirm, had come straight from their department to collect Mark.They listened to my story of the swing-park scene and examined the three-word message on a scrap of cardboard. Theyknew the family and asked if they could take the note away.They explained that they wouldn't be returning Mark to hismother--not yet, not until after another round of assessmentsand the decision of a judge. Their manner was kindly. Themore senior woman, whose name was Jasmin, stroked Mark'shead as she talked. Throughout the visit, Adam sat in silencein the same position at the table. I checked on him from timeous glance. We were in no mood to introduce him.

to time. Our visitors were aware of him and exchanged a curiAfter some administrative formalities, the women noddedat each other and the younger one sighed. The bad moment hadarrived. Miranda said nothing when the little boy, screamingto stay with her and clutching a fistful of her hair, was liftedfrom her arms. As the social workers were leading him outthrough the front door, Miranda turned away abruptly to goupstairs.

Our troubled little household also shook in the largertremors of confusion that were running through the landbeyond north Clapham. Turmoil was general. Mrs. Thatcher'sunpopularity was rising, and not just because of The Sinking.Tony Benn, the high-born socialist, was at last Leader of theOpposition. In debates he was savage and entertaining, butMargaret Thatcher could take care of herself. Prime Minister's Questions, now televised live and repeated at prime time,became a national obsession as the two tore into each other,sometimes wittily, each Wednesday at noon. Some said it wasrial combats of the Late Roman Republic.

encouraging that a mass audience was interested in parlia mentary exchanges. One commentator invoked the gladiatoThe summer was hot and something was coming to theboil. Apart from the government's unpopularity, much elsewas rising: unemployment, inflation, strikes, traffic jams, sui cide rates, teenage pregnancies, racist incidents, drug addiction, homelessness, rapes, muggings and depression amongchildren. Benign elements were rising too: households withindoor lavatories, central heating, phones and broadband; stu dents at school until eighteen, working-class students at university; attendance at classical music concerts, car and homeownership, holidays abroad, museum and zoo visits, takings atbingo halls, salmon in the Thames, numbers of TV channels,numbers of women in Parliament, charity donations, nativetree plantings, paperback book sales, music lessons across allages and instruments and styles.

At the Royal Free Hospital in London a seventy-four-year old retired coal miner was cured of severe arthritis when a culture of his stem cells was injected just below his kneecaps. Sixmonths later he ran a mile in under eight minutes. A teenagegirl had her sight restored by similar means. It was the goldenage of the life sciences, of robotics---of course--and of cosmology, climatology, mathematics and space exploration. Therewas a renaissance in British film and television, in poetry, athletics, gastronomy, numismatics, stand-up comedy, ballroomdancing and wine-making. It was the golden age of organisedcrime, domestic slavery, forgery and prostitution. Various formsof crises blossomed like tropical flowers: in childhood poverty,in children's teeth, in obesity, in house and hospital building,in police numbers, in teacher recruitment, in the sexual abuseof children. The best British universities were among the mostprestigious in the world. A group of neuroscientists at Queen'sSquare, London, claimed to understand the neural correlatesof consciousness. In the Olympic Games, a record number ofgold medals. Natural woodland, heaths and wetlands werevanishing. Scores of species of birds, insects and mammalswere close to extinction. Our seas teemed with plastic bagsand bottles but the rivers and beaches were cleaner. Withintwo years, six Nobel Prizes were won in science and literatureby British citizens. More people than ever joined choirs, morepeople gardened, more people wanted to cook interestingly.If there ever was a spirit of the times, the railways caught itbest. The prime minister was fanatical about public transport.From London Euston to Glasgow Central, the trains tore alongat half the speed of a passenger jet. And yet: the carriages werepacked, the seats too close together, the windows opaque withstop journey took seventy-five minutes.

grime, the stained upholstery smelled foul. And yet: the nonGlobal temperatures rose. As the air in the cities becamecleaner, the temperature rose faster. Everything was rising--hopes and despair, misery, boredom and opportunity. Therewas more of everything. It was a time of plenty.

I calculated that my earnings from online trading werejust below the national average wage. I should have been content. I had my freedom. No office, no boss, no daily commute.No hierarchies to climb. But inflation was at seventeen percent. I was at one with an embittered workforce. We were allgetting poorer by the week. Before Adam's arrival I had beenon marches, an imposter as I followed behind proud tradeunion banners up Whitehall to speeches in Trafalgar Square.I wasn't a worker. I made or invented or serviced nothing andgave nothing to the common good. Moving figures around onmy screen, looking for quick gains, I contributed as much asner of my street.

the chain-smoking fellows outside the betting shop on the corOn one march, a crude robot made of dustbins and tin canswas hanged from a gibbet by Nelson's Column. Benn, the keynote speaker, gestured at it from the platform and condemnedthe conception as Luddite. In an age of advanced mechanisation and artificial intelligence, he told the crowd, jobs could nolonger be protected. Not in a dynamic, inventive, globalisedeconomy. Jobs-for-life was old hat. There were boos and slowhand-clapping. Many in the crowd missed what came next.Flexibility at work had to be combined with security--forall. It wasn't jobs we had to protect, it was the well-being ofworkers. Infrastructure investment, training, higher education and a universal wage. Robots would soon be generatinggreat wealth in the economy. They must be taxed. Workersmust own an equity share in the machines that were disrupting or annihilating their jobs. In a crowd that spilled acrossthe square, right up the steps to the doors of the National Gallery, there was a baffled near-silence, with scattered applauseas well as catcalls. Some thought that the prime ministerherself had said much the same thing, minus the universalcredit. Had the new Leader of the Opposition been turned byhis membership of the Privy Council, by a visit to the WhiteHouse, by tea with the Queen? The rally broke up in a mood ofconfusion and despondency. What most people remembered,what made the headlines, was that Tony Benn had told hissupporters that he didn't care about their jobs.

An enlightened Transport and General Workers Unionwould not have been tempted by shares in Adam. He producedeven less than me. I at least paid tax on my meagre profit.He idled about the house, staring into the middle distance,"thinking."

"What are you doing?"

"I'm pursuing certain thoughts. But if there's something Ican help with--""What thoughts?"

"Difficult to put into words."

I confronted him at last, two days after Mark's visit. "So,the other night. You made love to Miranda."

I'll say this for his programmers. He looked startled. Buthe said nothing. I hadn't asked a question.

I said, "How do you feel about that now?" I saw in his facethat fleeting paralysis.

"I feel I've let you down."

"You mean you betrayed me, caused me great distress."

"Yes, I caused you great distress."

tence spoken.

Mirroring. A machine response, endorsing the last senI said, "Listen carefully. You are now going to promise methat it will never happen again."

He replied too immediately for my liking, "I promise itwill never happen again."

"Spell it out. Let me hear it."

"I promise you that I will never again make love toMiranda."

As I turned away he said, "But. . ."

"But what?"

"1 can't help my feelings. You have to allow me myfeelings."

I thought for a moment. "Do you really feel anything atall?"

"That's not a question I can--""Answer it."

"I feel things profoundly. More than I can say."

"Difficult to prove," I said.

"Indeed. An ancient problem."

We left it at that.

Mark's departure had an effect on Miranda. For two orthree days, she was lacklustre. She tried to read but her concentration was poor. The Corn Laws lost their fascination.She didn't eat much. I made minestrone soup and took someupstairs. She ate like an invalid, and soon pushed the bowlaway. At no point during this time did she mention the deaththreat. She hadn't forgiven Adam for betraying her courtsecrets or for calling in the social workers without her consent. One evening she asked me to stay with her. On the bedshe lay on my arm, then we kissed. Our lovemaking was constrained. I was distracted by the thought of Adam's presenceand even imagined I detected the scent of warm electronics onher sheets. There was little satisfaction for us, and eventuallywe turned away, disappointed.

One afternoon we walked to Clapham Common. Shewanted me to show her Mark's swing park. On our wayback, we went into Holy Trinity Church. Three women werearranging flowers near the altar. We sat in silence in a rearpew. At last, clumsily concealing my seriousness behind a joke,I told her that this was just the sort of rational church she and Icould get married in. She murmured, "Please. Not that," as sheuncoupled her arm from mine. I was offended and annoyed atmyself. She in turn seemed repelled by me. On the walk home,a coolness between us set in that lasted into the following day.That evening, downstairs, I consoled myself with a bottleof Minervois. It was the night of a storm engulfing the entirecountry as it rolled in from the Atlantic. A 70 mph gale. Stinging rain thrashed the windowpanes and penetrated one of therotten frames and dripped into a bucket.

I said to Adam, "We have some unfinished business, youand I. What was Miranda's accusation against Gorringe?"He said, "There's something I need to say."

"OK."

"I find myself in a difficult position."

"Yes?"

"I made love to Miranda because she asked me to. I didn'tknow how to refuse her without being impolite, or seeming toreject her somehow. I knew you'd be angry."

"Did you take any pleasure in it?"

"Of course I did. Absolutely."

I didn't like his emphasis but I kept my expression blank.He said, "I found out about Peter Gorringe for myself. Sheswore me to secrecy. Then you demanded to know and I hadto tell you. Or start to. She heard me and was angry. You seethe difficulty."

"Up to a point."

"Serving two masters."

I said, "So you're not going to tell me about this accusation.""I can't. I promised a second time."

"When?"

"After they took the boy away."

We were silent while I took this in.

Then Adam said, "There's something else."

In the low light from the lamp suspended over the kitchentable the hardness in his features was softened. He lookedbeautiful, even noble. A muscle in his high cheekbone rippled.I saw also that his lower lip was quivering. I waited."I could do nothing about this," he said.

Before he started to explain, I knew what was coming.

Ridiculous!

"I'm in love with her."

My pulse rate didn't increase, but my heart felt uncomfortable in my chest, as though mishandled and left lying at arough angle.

1 said, "How can you possibly be in love?"

"Please don't insult me."

cessing units."

But I wanted to. "There must be a problem with your proHe crossed his arms and rested them on the table. Leaningforward, he spoke softly. "Then there's nothing more to say."I too crossed my arms, I too leaned forward across thetable. Our faces were barely a foot apart. I too spoke softly."You're wrong. There are many things to say and this is theable sense, you're trespassing."

first. Existentially, this is not your territory. In every conceiv I was playing in a melodrama. I took him only half seriously and was rather enjoying this game of stags-at-rut. AsI was speaking, he leaned back in his chair and let his armsdrop to his side.

He said, "I understand. But I don't have a choice. I wasmade to love her."

"Oh, come on!"

"I mean it literally. I now know that she had a hand inshaping my personality. She must have had a plan. This iswhat she chose. I swear I'll keep my promise to you, but I can'thelp loving her. I don't want to stop. As Schopenhauer saidabout free will, you can choose whatever you desire, but you'renot free to choose your desires. I also know that it was youridea to let her have a hand in making me what I am. Ultimately, responsibility for the situation rests with you."The situation? Now it was my turn to lean back from thetable. I slumped in my chair and for a minute I withdrewinto thoughts of myself and Miranda. I too had no choice inlove. I thought of the relevant section in the user's handbook.There were pages I had skimmed of tables, one spectrum afteranother on a scale of one to ten. The sort of person I like orI adore or I love or cannot resist. While she and I were settling into our nightly routine, she was fashioning a man whowas bound to love her. Some self-knowledge would have beenrequired, some setting in motion. She would not need to lovethis man, this figurine, in return. As with Adam, so with me.She had wrapped us in a common fate.

I got up from the table and crossed the room to the window. The south-westerly wind was still hurling the downpouracross the garden fences, against the pane. The bucket on thefloor was near to overflowing. I picked it up and emptied itinto the kitchen sink. The water was gin-clear, as trout fish ermen say. The solution too was clear, at least in the immediate term. Time to be gained for reflection. I went back tothe window with the bucket. I bent down and set it in place.I was about to do the sensible thing. I approached the tableand as I passed behind Adam, I reached for the special placelow on his neck. My knuckles brushed against his skin. As Ipositioned my forefinger, he turned in his chair and his righthand rose up to encircle my wrist. The grip was ferocious. Asit grew tighter, I dropped to my knees and concentrated ondenying him the satisfaction of the slightest murmur of pain,even when I heard something snap.

Adam heard it too and was instantly apologetic. He let goof me. "Charlie, I believe I've broken something. I really didn'tmean to. I'm truly sorry. Are you in a lot of pain? But please,I don't want you or Miranda ever to touch that place again."I discovered the next morning, after a five-hour wait andan X-ray in the local Accident and Emergency department,that an important bone in my wrist was compromised. It was amessy break, a partly displaced scaphoid fracture, and it wouldtake months to heal.

hen I got back from the hospital, an hour after lunch,Miranda was waiting for me. She intercepted me inthe hall by her front door. We'd already been talkingon the phone while I waited to be treated and I had a lot moreto say, and I had some questions too. But she led me upstairs toher bedroom and there my words died in my throat. I relaxedinto her concern for me. I was encased in plaster from elbowto wrist. While we made love, I protected my arm with a pillow. We passed into the sublime. At least for a while, she waspersonal as well as inventive, she was solicitous, and joyous,and so was I. It was me she was with, not any capable man. Ididn't dare threaten with questions the novel and exalted feelings that passed between us. I couldn't bring myself to ask herabout Peter Gorringe, or about what she had told the court,or tell her what I had already discovered about the case whilesitting in Accident and Emergency. 1 didn't ask her whethershe knew that Adam was "in love" with her, or whether shehad intended to dispose him to be so. I didn't want to refer tothe coolness between us after I'd mentioned marriage in HolyTrinity Church. How could I when at one point she pressed myface between her palms and looked into my eyes and shook herhead, as if in wonder?

Afterwards, I remained silent on these subjects because Igreedily thought that within the half-hour we would be goingback to her bed, even though she was pulling away from meagain as we drank coffee in her kitchen. I was happy to believethat all questions and tensions would be settled later. Wetalked now in a businesslike way, first about Mark. We agreedto try to find out what was happening to him. She was concerned about Adam. She thought I should take him back to theshop for a check-up. She still held to her plan for the three ofus to drive to Salisbury to visit her father. I didn't say that theprospect of us packed into my small car, spending the entireday covering for Adam and being polite to a difficult, dyingman, had no appeal. 1 was keen to want whatever she wanted.We didn't go back to bed. A silence forced its way betweenus. I could see that she was already withdrawing into her private world and I didn't know what to say. Besides, she had aseminar at King's, in the Strand. I decided to settle my feelingsby avoiding Adam downstairs and going straight out for a strollon the Common. There I walked up and down for two hours.My inaccessible wrist itched as I thought about Miranda. Ididn't know how we had traversed so smoothly from coolnessto joy, from suspicion to ecstasy, and from there to an impersonal conversation about arrangements. She excited me and Icouldn't understand her. Perhaps some intelligible part of herhad been damaged. I was anxious to dismiss that. It must bethat she knew more about love, the deeper processes of love,than I did. So she was a force, but not of nature, not even ofnurture. More like a psychological arrangement, or a theorem,a hypothesis, a glorious accident, like light falling on water.Wasn't that of nature, and wasn't this old hat, men thinking ofwomen as blind forces? Then, might she resemble a counterintuitive Euclidean proof? I couldn't think of one. But afterhalf an hour of fast walking, I thought I'd found the mathematical expression for her: her psyche, her desires and motiveswere inexorable, like prime numbers, simply and unpredictably there. More old hat, dressed as logic. I was in knots.Pacing the littered grass, I numbed myself with truisms.She is who she is. She's herself and that's the end of it! Sheapproaches love with caution because she knows how explosiveit can be. As for her beauty, at my age, in my state, I was boundto think of it as a moral quality, as its own justification, thebadge of her essential goodness, whatever she might actuallydo. And look what she had done--from my waist almost tomy knees I still felt the afterglow of the most intense sensualrelate glowed too.

pleasure I had ever known, and everywhere its emotional corI had done two turns when I stopped in one of the larger,emptier expanses of the Common. A good way off, on all sides,the traffic turned about me like planets. Usually it oppressedme to reflect that every car contained a nexus of worries, memories and hopes as vital and complicated as my own. Today Iwelcomed and forgave everyone. We would all turn out well.We were all bound together in our own overlapping but distinct forms of comedy. Others might also have a lover livingwith a death threat. But no one else with an arm in a cast hada machine for a love rival.

I headed home, north along the High Street, past theburned-out premises of the Anglo-Argentinian FriendshipSociety, past the stinking black heaps of plastic sacks, trebledin height since I was last this way. A German company hadlaunched their bipedal dustmen-automata in Glasgow. Publiccontempt was aroused because each one wore the perpetualgrin of a contented worker. If Adam could make an origamiboat in seconds, it should not have been much of a stretch tohave a drone chuck sacks into the mechanical maw of a garbage truck. But the filth and dust caused failure in the kneeand elbow joints, according to the Financial Times, and thecheaper batteries couldn't survive an eight-hour shift. Eachdevice cost five years' wages of a dustman. Unlike Adam, ithad an exoskeleton and weighed 350 pounds. The automatawere falling behind on the work, and on Sauchiehall Streetthe bags were piling up. In Hanover, a robot dustman hadstepped backwards into the path of an autonomous electricbus. Teething troubles. But in our part of the country, humanswere cheaper, and they remained on strike. General outragehad given way to apathy. Someone said on the radio that thestink was no more remarkable than in Calcutta or Dar esSalaam. We could all adapt.

Peter Gorringe. Once I had the name, it was easy to findthe press reports as I waited with my throbbing wrist in Casu alty. They dated back three years and, as I'd guessed, concerned a rape. As victim, Miranda's name was withheld. Inbroad outline, the case resembled a thousand others: alcoholand a dispute over consent. She went one evening to Gorringe's bedsit in the centre of town. They knew each otherfrom school, which they had left only months before, but theywere not close friends. That night, alone together, they dranka fair amount and around nine o'clock, after some kissing,which neither side denied, he forced himself on her, accordingto the prosecution. She tried to fight him off.

Both parties agreed that intercourse took place. Gorringe'sdefence, provided through legal aid, argued that she had beena willing partner. Counsel made much of the fact that she hadnot called out for help during the alleged assault, nor had sheleft Gorringe's place until two hours later, or made any dis tressed phone calls to police, parents or friends. The prosecution case was that she was in a state of shock. She had sat onthe edge of the bed, half dressed, unable to move or speak.She left around eleven, went straight home, did not wake herfather, lay on her bed crying until she fell asleep. The nextmorning she went to the local police station.

It was in Gorringe's story that the particulars of this caseemerged. He told the court that after they made love, theydrank more vodka and lemonade, that the post-coital moodwas celebratory. She asked him if he had any objection to hertexting her new friend Amelia to announce that she and Peterwere an "item." Within a minute there came a reply in theform of a laughing emoticon making the thumbs-up sign. Thecase for the defence should have been simple. But the messageswere not on Miranda's phone. Amelia had been living in a hostel for problem teenagers, and had gone off backpacking andcouldn't be traced. The phone company in Canada would notrelease their record of texts without a formal approach fromthe police. But the police had targets to meet for solved rapecases and were keen to see Gorringe go down. They knew, asing and affray.

the jury did not, that he had previous convictions for shopliftIn evidence, Miranda was emphatic that she had no friendcalled Amelia and that the story of the text was a fabrication.Two of Miranda's old school friends gave evidence in court thatthey had never heard mention of this Amelia. The prosecution suggested that it was too convenient, a vanishing rootlessteenager. If she was on a beach in Thailand, and if Mirandawas her friend, where were the customary teenage photos andmessages? Where was Miranda's original message? Wherewas that merry emoticon?

Deleted by Miranda, said the defence. If the court wouldsuspend proceedings and serve an order on the British subsidiary of the phone company to release its copies of the texts,these disputed versions of a summer evening would be settled.But the judge, whose manner throughout was impatient, evenirritable, was in no mind to let the matter drag on. Mr. Gorringe's defence had already had many months to mount theircase. A court order should have been sought long ago. Memorably, the judge noted that a young woman who took a bottleof vodka to a young man's room should have been aware of therisks. Some press reports portrayed Gorringe as a guilty sort.He was large, loose-limbed, he lounged in the dock, he didn'twear a tie. He appeared not to be awed by the judge or hiscourt and its procedures. The jury was unanimous in favouring Miranda's story over his. Later, in his summing-up, thejudge did not find the accused a credible witness. But certainsections of the press were sceptical about Miranda's story. Thejudge was criticised for not putting the matter beyond doubtby calling in her text records.

A week later, before sentencing, there were pleas of mitigation. The headmaster of their school spoke up for bothex-pupils--hardly helpful. Gorringe's mother, who was tooscared to be articulate, tried bravely but wept from the witnessstand. No use at all to her son. He rose for sentencing and wasimpassive. Six years. He shook his head, as the accused oftendo. If he behaved himself in prison, he would be gone for halfhis sentence.

The jury had confronted a stark choice. Miranda raped andhonest, or unmolested and a cruel liar. Naturally, I could bearneither. I didn't take Gorringe's murderous threats as proof ofhis innocence, as the intentions of a wronged man looking forredress. A guilty man could be furious at his loss of freedom.If he could threaten to kill, he could surely rape.

Beyond the either-or was a dangerous middle groundwhere the half-forgotten student anthropologist in me couldfree his imagination of all constraint. Grant the insidiouspower of self-persuasion, mix in some hours of carefree teen age drinking and blurred recall, then it would have been possible for Miranda to feel genuinely that she'd been violated,especially if afterwards there were elements of shame; equallypossible for Peter Gorringe to convince himself he had permission when he desired it so urgently. But in the criminalcourts, the sword of justice fell on innocence or guilt, not bothat once.

The story of the missing texts was particular, inventive,easily verified or disproved. By telling it to the court, Gorringela n McEw a nas rapist may have calculated that he had nothing to lose. Awild fiction and he almost got away with it. If he was innocent,if the texts existed, then the system had let him down. Eitherway, it had let itself down. His story should have been checked.On that, I was with the sceptical press. The blame could liewith an inexperienced legal aid team, too hard-pressed, toosloppy. Or with policemen greedy for success. And certainlywith an ill-tempered judge.

On my way back from the Common, 1 slowed as I turnedinto my road. Now I knew as much as Adam. I hadn't spoken tohim since the evening before. After a painful, sleepless night,I had got up early to go to the hospital. As I went throughthe kitchen I had passed close by him. He was sitting at thekitchen table as usual, connected to his power line. His eyeswere open and had that tranquil, faraway look whenever heretreated into his circuits. I had hesitated there for a wholeminute, wondering what I had got into with my purchase. Hewas far more complicated than I'd imagined, and so were myown feelings about him. We had to confront each other, but Iwas exhausted from two broken nights and needed to get tothe hospital.

What I wanted now, returning from my walk, was toretreat to my bedroom for a dose of painkillers and a nap. Buthe was standing facing me as I came in. At the sight of myarm suspended in its sling, he gave a cry of astonishment orhorror. He came towards me, arms spread.

"Charlie! I am so sorry. So sorry. What a terrible thing Idid. I honestly didn't intend it. Will you please, please acceptmy most sincere apologies."

It looked as though he was about to embrace me. Withmy free hand, I pushed past--I disliked the too-solid feeland went to the sink. I turned on the tap and bentlow to drink deeply. When I turned, he was standing close,no more than three or four feet away. The moment of apology had passed. 1 was determined to look relaxed--not so easywith my arm in a sling. I put my free hand on my hip andlooked into his eyes, into the nursery blue with its little blackseeds. 1 still wondered what it meant, that Adam could see,and who or what did the seeing. A torrent of zeros and onesflashed towards various processors that, in turn, directed a cascade of interpretation towards other centres. No mechanisticexplanation could help. It couldn't resolve the essential difference between us. I had little idea of what passed along my ownoptic nerve, or where it went next, or how these pulses becamean encompassing self-evident visual reality, or who was doingmy seeing for me. Only me. Whatever the process was, it hadthe trick of seeming beyond explanation, of creating and sustaining an illuminated part of the one thing in the world weknew for sure--our own experience. It was hard to believethat Adam possessed something like that. Easier to believethat he saw in the way a camera does, or the way a microphoneis said to listen. There was no one there.

of himBut as I looked into his eyes, I began to feel unhinged,uncertain. Despite the clean divide between the living andthe inanimate, it remained the case that he and I were boundby the same physical laws. Perhaps biology gave me no specialstatus at all, and it meant little to say that the figure standingasn't fully alive. In my fatigue, I felt unmoored,drifting into the oceanic blue and black, moving in two direc-towards the uncontrollable future we weremaking for ourselves where we might finally dissolve our biological identities; at the same time, into the ancient past ofan infant universe, where the common inheritance, in diminishing order, was rocks, gases, compounds, elements, forces,ness in whatever form it took.

energy fields--for both of us, the seeding ground of consciousI came out of this reverie with a start. I confronted animmediate and unpleasant situation and wasn't inclinedto accept Adam as a brother, or even a very distant cousin,however much Stardust we shared. I had to stand up to him.I started talking. I told him how I came by a large sum ofmoney after my mother's death and the sale of her house. HowI decided to invest it in a grand experiment, to buy an artificial human, an android, a replicate--I forget which term Iused. In his presence, they all sounded like insults. I told himexactly how much I paid. Then I described for him the afternoon when Miranda and I carried him on a stretcher into thehouse, unpacked him, charged him up, when I tenderly gavehim my clothes, and discussed the formation of his personality. As I went along, I wasn't certain of my purpose, or why Iwas talking so fast.

It was only when I got there that I knew what I had tosay. My point was this: I had bought him, he was mine, I haddecided to share him with Miranda, and it would be our decision, and only ours, to decide when to deactivate him. If heresisted, and especially if he caused injury as he had the nightbefore, then he would have to be returned to the manufacturerfor readjustment. I finished by saying that this was Miranda'sview, as she expressed it earlier this afternoon, just before wemade love. This last intimate detail, for the lowest of reasons,I needed him to know.

Throughout, he remained impassive, blinking at irregularintervals, holding my gaze. When I finished, nothing changedfor half a minute and I began to think I had gone too fast, orspoken gibberish. Suddenly he came to life (to life!), lookeddown at his feet, then turned and walked a few paces away. Heturned again to look at me, drew breath to speak, changed hismind. A hand went up to stroke his chin. What a performance.Perfect. I was ready to give him my devoted attention.His tone was of the sweetest, most reasonable kind.

"We're in love with the same woman. We can talk about it ina civilised manner, as you just have. Which convinces me thatwe've passed the point in our friendship when one of us has thepower to suspend the consciousness of the other."

I said nothing.

He continued. "You and Miranda are my oldest friends. Ilove you both. My duty to you is to be clear and frank. I meanit when I say how sorry I am I broke a bit of you last night.I promise it will never happen again. But the next time youreach for my kill switch, I'm more than happy to remove yourarm entirely, at the ball and socket joint."

ficult task.

I said, "That would be messy. And fatal."

He said this kindly, as though offering help with some dif"Oh no. There are ways of doing it cleanly and safely.A practice refined in medieval times. Galen was the first todescribe it. Speed is of the essence."

"Well, don't take my good arm."

He had been speaking through a smile. Now he began tolaugh. So here it was, his first attempt at a joke, and I joinedin. I was in a state of exhaustion and suddenly found it wildlyhilarious.

As I passed him on my way to the bedroom he said, "Seriously. After last night I came to a decision. I've found a way todisable the kill switch. Easier for all of us."

"Good," I said, not quite taking this in. "Very sensible."I entered my room and closed the door behind me. I kickedoff my shoes, and lay on the bed on my back, softly laughing tomyself. Then, forgetting about the painkillers, I was asleep inless than two minutes.

The next morning I turned thirty-three. It rained all dayand I worked for nine hours, content to be indoors. For the firsttime in weeks, my profit for the day was in three figures--just.At seven I stood up from my desk, stretched, yawned, lookedin my drawer for a clean white shirt, then took a bath. I had tohang my arm over the edge to protect the cast from dissolving,but otherwise I was in good shape. I lay in the heat and risingsteam, singing snatches of Beatles songs in the tiled echo, thenew old Beatles, and occasionally topping up the hot with myhealed toe now fit to turn a tap. I soaped myself single-handed.Not easy. Thirty-three seemed as significant as twenty-one andMiranda was treating me to dinner. We were meeting up inSoho. The simple prospect of a rendezvous with her raised myspirits. The view I had along the length of my body was uplifting in the misty light. My penis, capsized above its submergedreef of hair, winked encouragement with a cocky single eye.So it should. The muscles of my gut and legs looked nicelysculpted. Heroic even. I wallowed in self-love, happier than I'dbeen in weeks. I'd been trying not to think about Adam all dayand had almost succeeded. He'd been in the kitchen for hours,he was there now--"thinking." I didn't care. I sang louder.In my twenties, some of my most cheerful times were spentgetting ready to go out. It was the anticipation rather thanthe thing itself. The release from work, the bath, music, cleanclothes, white wine, perhaps a pull on a joint. Then steppingout into the evening, free and hungry.

The pads of my fingers were well wrinkled by the timeI got out. An adaptation, I'd read, of our sea- and river-lovingancestors to enable them to catch fish. I didn't believe it, butI liked the story, the way it lay beyond disproof. We didn'tcatch fish with our feet, so toes didn't need to wrinkle likethat. I dressed in a hurry. In the kitchen I passed Adam without a word--he didn't look round--and put up my umbrellato walk the few hundred yards down a squalid side-street towhere my wreck of a car was parked. This short depressingstroll often brought me to my usual lament, to the song of myunhappy lot. But not tonight.

My car dated from the mid-sixties, a British LeylandUrbala, the first model to do 1,000 miles on a single charge,it had 380,000 on the clock. Rust was eating it away, especially around the dents in the bodywork. The wing mirrorshad snapped or been snapped off. There was a long white rip inthe driver's seat and a piece of the steering wheel, from elevento three o'clock, was missing. Years ago, a girl had been sick onthe back seat after a rowdy Indian dinner and not even professional steam-cleaning could erase the scent of vindaloo. TheUrbala had only two doors and it was awkward to get an adultinto the back seat. But there was little to go wrong with theseengines and the car ran smooth and fast. It was an automaticand easy to drive with one hand.

I took my usual route, singing all the way, to Vauxhall,then downstream with the river on my left, past Lambeth Palace and the abandoned St. Thomas's Hospital, where scores orhundreds of the homeless squatted. The windscreen wiper onthe driver's side worked every ten seconds or so. The wiperon the passenger side thumped out a beat to my pop tunes. Icrossed the Thames by Waterloo Bridge--in both directions,best views in town--then slipped down to take the sinuouscurves of the old tram tunnel at speed and burst in triumphinto Holborn--not the shortest route to Soho, but my favourite. I was hitting some high notes on a new Lennon song.What was right with me? Thirty-three today and in love.The unaccountable brew of hormone cocktails--endorphins,dopamine, oxytocin and all the rest. Cause or effect or association--we knew next to nothing about our passing moods. Itseemed objectionable that they should have a material base.On this particular evening, I hadn't touched grass or even hada sip of wine--there was nothing in the house. Yesterday I hadbeen almost thirty-three and in love and I hadn't felt like this.PS104 up on the morning would never have such an effect. Ishould have been sobered by yesterday's exchange with Adamabout his kill switch, by all the matters I hadn't raised withMiranda, by my poor wrist. But a mood could be a roll of thedice. Chemical roulette. Free will demolished, and here I was,feeling free.

I parked in Soho Square. I knew of a three-metre stretchwhere the yellow lines had been tarred over in error and thespace was legal. Most cars wouldn't fit. Our restaurant, a oneroom shoebox with fierce strip lighting, was in Greek Street,just a few doors along from the famous L'Escargot. There wereonly seven tables. In a corner was an open kitchen, a tiny spacedefined by a brushed-steel counter, where two chefs in whitegear cooked in sweaty proximity. There was a plongeur, andone waiter to serve and clear tables. Unless you knew the chef,or knew someone who did, you couldn't book. Miranda had afriend at one further remove. On a quiet night it was enough.She was there before me, already seated, facing the door asI came in. In front of her was an untouched glass of sparklingwater. Beside it, a small parcel done up with green ribbon. Bythe table, in an ice bucket on a stand, was a bottle of champagne, its neck bound in a white napkin. The waiter, whohad just drawn the cork, was walking away. Miranda lookedespecially elegant, even though she'd been at seminars all dayand had left the house wearing jeans and a t-shirt. She wouldhave taken with her a bag of clothes and make-up. She wore ablack pencil skirt and a tight black jacket with boxy shouldersand silver thread woven through the fabric. I'd never seen herbefore with lipstick and mascara. She had made her mouthsmaller, in a dark red bow, and dusted away the faint freckleson the bridge of her nose. My birthday! At the same time, as Ientered the bright white light and closed the restaurant's glassdoor behind me, I felt a sudden elated detachment. I didn't, Icouldn't, love her less. But I no longer had to feel anxious ordesperate about her. I remembered my truisms from the daybefore. Here she was, and whatever she was, I would find outand celebrate her, regardless. I could love her, so I thought, andremain immune, unharmed.

All this in a flash as I squeezed between two crowdedtables to get to her. She raised her right hand and in mockformal fashion I bowed and kissed it. As I sat down she gazedat my sling with evident pity.

"Poor darling."

The waiter--he looked sixteen and serious--came withglasses, and filled them while holding his hand behind hisback. A professional.

As we raised and clinked them across the table, I said, "ToAdam not breaking more of my bones."

"That's rather limiting."

We laughed, and it seemed as though laughter at theother tables followed and rose with ours. What a wild placewe were in. She didn't know how much, how little, I knew. Ididn't know what to believe about her, whether she was thevictim or perpetrator of a crime. It didn't matter. We were inlove and I remained convinced that even if I came to knowthe worst, it would make no difference. Love would see usthrough. It should have been easier, therefore, to broach anyof the issues that my cowardice inclined me to suppress. AndI was on the edge of doing just that, of saying more about mybroken scaphoid, when she took my good hand in hers acrossthe white linen.

"Yesterday was glorious."

I was giddy. It was as if she had proposed that we makelove in public, now, across the table.

"We could go home right now."

She did a comic little double-take. "You haven't openedyour present."

She pushed it across with a forefinger. While I unwrappedit, our boy waiter refilled the glasses. I found a small plaincardboard box. Inside was a z-shaped piece of strip metal withpadding on the parallel surfaces. A wrist exerciser.

"For when your plaster comes off."

I stood and went around the table to kiss her. Someonenearby said, "Oi-oi!" Another person made the sound of abarking dog. I wasn't bothered. Back in my seat I said, "Adamsays he's disabled his kill switch."

She leaned forward, suddenly serious. "You've got to gethim back to the shop."

"But he loves you. He told me."

"You're making fun of me."

I said, "If he needs reprogramming, you're the one he'lllisten to."

Her tone was plaintive. "How can he talk about love? Thisis madness."

Our waiter was hovering and heard everything we saidnext, even though I murmured quickly. "You helped choosethe kind of guy he is--the sort who falls in love with the firstwoman he sleeps with."

"Oh, Charlie!"

The boy said, "Have you decided yet, or shall I come back?""Stick around."

We passed a couple of minutes choosing and changing ourminds. I ordered at random a twelve-year-old Haut-Medoc.It occurred to me that I was the one paying for my birthdaytreat. I cancelled the order and asked for a twenty-year-oldbottle of the same.

The waiter left and we paused to consider where we were.Miranda said, "Are you seeing someone else?"

The question astonished me and for a moment I was stuckfor the most reassuring and convincing reply. At the sametime, I noticed that the chef, who was also the owner, had comefrom behind the counter and was making his way between thetables to the door. The waiter was following him. I glancedover my shoulder and saw through the glass two figures outon the pavement. One of them was folding away an umbrella.I must have looked evasive to Miranda. She added, "Justbe honest with me. I don't mind."

She clearly did mind and I gave her my full attention."Absolutely not. You're all I care about."

"When I'm out all day at seminars?"

"I work and I think about you."

I felt a draught of cool air on my neck. Miranda's gazeshifted from me to the door and I felt I could turn again andlook. The chef was helping two elderly men out of their longraincoats, which he dumped into the arms of the waiter. Themen were led to their table--set apart and the only one witha lit candle. The taller man had swept-back silvery hair andwore a brown silk scarf loosely knotted around his neck andsome kind of artist's cotton jacket that drooped from his shoulders. A chair was held out for him and before sitting he lookedaround the room and nodded to himself. No one else in therestaurant seemed interested. The man's style of bohemiangrandeur was not so unusual in Soho. But I was excited.I turned back to Miranda, still aware of her surprisingquery, and placed my hand on hers.

"Do you know who he is?"

"No idea."

"Alan Turing."

"Your hero."

"And Thomas Reah, the physicist. Invented loop quantumgravity more or less single-handed."

"Go and say hello."

"That would not be cool."

So we returned to the question of the someone else I wasnot seeing, and once she appeared satisfied, we went back toAdam and discussed how we might overcome his resistance tothe kill switch. She suggested hiding the charging cables untilhe was too weak to resist us. I reminded her of his instant origami sailboat. He would improvise a power cable in minutes.My concentration was poor during this exchange. I kept looking at her, hallucinating a glow around her head and shouldersand thinking about the time when we would be alone, travel ling the smooth and rising curve to ecstasy. Even as I was hobbled by a state of continuous sexual arousal, it excited me to bein the same room as a great man. From pre-war meditations onthe idea of a universal computing machine, to Bletchley in theearly years of the war, to morphogenesis, to his glorious patrician present. The greatest living Englishman, noble and freein his love for another man. In his seniority, dressed with theflamboyance of a rock star, a genius painter, a knighted actor.I could see him only if I turned rudely away from Miranda.I resisted. I distracted myself with the usual list, the buriedsuspicions, all we had not touched on--the Salisbury courtcase and the death threat being the most rank. Where was mycourage when I lacked the clarity to raise these subjects, whenthey tormented me while they remained unspoken?

"You're not even listening."

"I am, I am. You said Adam's got a screw loose."

"I didn't. Idiot. But happy birthday."

We raised our glasses again. The Medoc was bottled whenMiranda was two years old and my father was moving out ofswing into bebop.

The meal was a success, but the bill was a long time coming. While we waited we decided on a parting cognac. Thedrinks the waiter brought were double measures, on the house.Miranda returned to the business of her father's illness. Thenew diagnosis was lymphoma, of a slow-acting kind. He waslikely to die with it rather than of it. He had much else to dieof. But there was a pill he now took that made him cheerfuland assertive--and even more of a handful. Impossible projects filled his thoughts. He wanted to sell the Salisbury houseand buy an apartment in New York, in the East Village, notthe current one, she suspected, but the Village of his youth.On a rush of self-belief, he had signed a contract to deliver acoffee-table book on the folklore of British birds--a vast project that he could never hope to complete, even with a full-timeresearcher. On a strange whim, given his views, he had joineda fringe political group dedicated to taking Britain out of theEuropean Union. He was up for election as treasurer at hisLondon club, the Athenaeum. Every day he phoned his daughter with new schemes. Everything I heard made me gloomierabout our proposed visit, but I said nothing.

At last we were done and we shrugged on our coats.

Miranda preceded me towards the door. Our path between thetables would take us close to Turing's. As we approached, Isaw that apart from a bowl of nuts, hardly touched, the distinguished diners had eaten nothing. They were here to talk anddrink. In an ice bucket was a half-bottle of Dutch genever, andon the table were ice cubes in a silver dish and two cut-glasstumblers. I was impressed. Would I be so game at seventy?Turing was facing me directly. The years had lengthened hisface, marking out the cheekbones, giving him a keen ferociouslook. Many years later I thought I saw the ghost of Alan Turingin the figure of the painter Lucian Freud. I crossed his pathlate one night as he came out of the Wolseley in Piccadilly.Same lean fitness in early old age that seemed derived lessfrom healthy living than from a hunger to keep on creating.The decision was taken for me by the cognac. I approachedas millions before me had approached a famous presence in apublic place, with outward humility masking the entitlementthat genuine admiration confers. Turing glanced up at me,then looked away. Dealing with admirers was Reah's business.I wasn't drunk enough to be unembarrassed and I stumbledover the formulaic opener.

found gratitude to you both for your work."

"That's very kind," Reah said. "What's your name?"

"Charlie Friend."

"Very nice to have met you, Charlie."

"Really sorry to intrude. I just wanted to express my proThe tense was clear. I came to my point. "I read that youhave one of these Adams or Eves. I've got one too. I wonderedif you've experienced any sort of problem with . . ."

I trailed away because I had seen Reah look at Turing,who had firmly shaken his head.

I took out my card and put it on their table. Neither manlooked at it. I retreated, muttering my foolish apologies.Miranda was right beside me. She took my hand and as westepped out into Greek Street she gave a sympathetic squeeze."In her loving look,a whole universe contained.

Love the universe!"

This was the first of his poems that Adam recited to me.He had come into my bedroom without knocking just aftereleven one morning, while I was working at my screen, hopingto take advantage of volatility in the currency markets. Therewas a square of sunlight on the carpet and he made a point ofstanding in it. I noticed he was wearing one of my turtlenecksweaters. He must have taken it from my drawer. He told mehe had a poem he urgently needed to recite. I swivelled in mychair and waited.

When he finished I said unkindly, "Short at least."

He winced. "A haiku."

"Ah. Nineteen syllables."

"Seventeen. Five then seven then five again. Here'sanother." He paused, looked towards the ceiling.

"Kiss the space where shetrod from here to the window.

She made prints in time."

I said, "Spacetime?"

"Yes!"

"OK," I said. "One more. I've got to get on."

"I've got hundreds. But look . . ."

He left his illuminated spot and came to my desk and puthis hand over the mouse. "These two rows of figures, don't yousee? Intersecting Fibonacci curves. A high probability that ifyou buy here and wait. . . now sell. Look. You made PS31.""Do that again."

"Best to wait."

"Then do me one more haiku and leave."

He returned to his square of light.

"You and the momentCame when I touched your--""I don't want to hear that."

"I shouldn't show it to her?"

I sighed and he moved away. As he reached the door Iadded, "Clean up the kitchen and bathroom, would you,please? Difficult to do with one hand."

He nodded and went away. A kind of peace or stabilityhad settled over our household, despite the matter of Gorringe's release. I was more relaxed. Adam was spending notime alone with Miranda, while I was with her every night. Iwas confident he would keep his promise. He had told me several times that he was in love, and chaste love was fine by me.He wrote poems in his thoughts and stored them there. Hewanted to talk to me about Miranda but I usually cut him off.I didn't dare attempt to power him down and I had no particular need. The plan to get him back to the salesroom was setaside. Love appeared to have softened him. For reasons I didn'tunderstand, he was eager for my approval. Guilt, perhaps. Hehad fallen back into a routine of vague obedience. I remainedcautious because of my wrist and I was watchful--but nothing of that showed. I reminded myself that he was still myexperiment, my adventure. It was not supposed to run smoothat every turn.

With Adam's love came intellectual exuberance. Heinsisted on telling me his latest thoughts, his theories, hisaphorisms, his latest reading. He was putting himself througha course on quantum mechanics. All night, while he chargedup, he contemplated the mathematics and the basic texts. Heread Schrodinger's Dublin lectures, What Is Life?, from whichhe concluded that he was alive. He read the transcript of thecelebrated 1927 Solvay conference, when the luminaries ofphysics met to discuss photons and electrons.

"It was said that at these early Solvay meetings there tookplace the most profound exchanges about nature in the historyof ideas."

I was at breakfast. I told him I'd once read that the elderlyEinstein, while at Princeton in his final years, started eachday with eggs fried in butter and that in Adam's honour, I wasfrying two now for myself.

Adam said, "People said he never grasped what he himselfhad started. Solvay was a battlefield for him. Outnumbered,poor fellow. By extraordinary young men. But that was unfair.The young Turks weren't concerned with what nature is, onlywith what one could say about it. Whereas Einstein thoughtthere was no science without belief in an external world independent of the observer. He didn't think quantum mechanicswas wrong so much as incomplete."

This after one night's study. I remembered my hopelessbrief entanglement with physics at college, before I foundsafety in anthropology. 1 suppose I was a little jealous, especially when I learned that Adam had got his mind roundstand quantum theory.

Dirac's equation. 1 cited Richard Feynman's remark that any one who claims to understand quantum theory doesn't under Adam shook his head. "A bogus paradox, if it's even a paradox at all. Tens of thousands understand it, millions makeuse of it. It's a matter of time, Charlie. General relativity wasonce at the outer edge of difficulty. Now it's routine for firstyear undergraduates. The same was true of the calculus. Nowfourteen-year-olds can do it. One day quantum mechanics willpass into common sense."

By this time I was eating my eggs. Adam had made thecoffee. It was far too strong. I said, "OK. What about that Solvay question? Is quantum mechanics a description of nature orjust an effective way of predicting things?"

"I would have been on Einstein's side. I don't understandthe doubt about it," he said. "Quantum mechanics makes predictions to such a fabulous degree of accuracy, it must be gettingsomething right about nature. To creatures of our immensesize, the material world looks blurred and feels hard. But nowwe know how strange and wonderful it is. So it shouldn't surprise us that consciousness, your sort and mine, could arisefrom an arrangement of matter--it's clearly odd to just theright degree. And we don't have anything else to explainhow matter can think and feel." Then he added, "Except forbeams of love from the eyes of God. But then, beams can beinvestigated."

Another morning, after he had told me how he had beening about vision and death."

"Go on."

thinking all night of Miranda, he said, "I've also been think"We don't see everywhere. We can't see behind our heads.We can't even see our chins. Let's say our field of vision isalmost 180 degrees, counting in peripheral awareness. Theodd thing is, there's no boundary, no edge. There isn't visionand then blackness, like you get when you look through binoculars. There isn't something, then nothing. What we have isthe field of vision, and then beyond it less than nothing.""So?"

"So this is what death is like. Less than nothing. Less thanblackness. The edge of vision is a good representation of theedge of consciousness. Life, then death. It's a foretaste, Charlie,and it's there all day."

"Nothing to be afraid of then," I said.

He raised both hands as if to grip and shake a trophy."Exactly right! Less than nothing to be afraid of!"

Was he covering for an anxiety about death? His term wasfixed for approximately twenty years. When I asked, he said,"That's the difference between us, Charlie. My body partswill be improved or replaced. But my mind, my memories,experiences, identity and so on will be uploaded and retained.They'll be of use."

Poetry was another instance of his exuberance in love. Hehad written 2,000 haikus and had recited about a dozen, of thesame quality, each one devoted to Miranda. I'd been interestedat first in learning what Adam could create. But I soon lostinterest in the form itself. Too cute, too devoted to not makingmuch sense, too undemanding of their author as they playedon empty mysteries of the sound-of-one-hand-clapping sort.Two thousand! The figure made my point--an algorithm waschurning them out. I said all this as we walked the backstreetsof Stockwell--our daily exercise to extend Adam's social skills.We'd been into shops, pubs and had even taken a trip on theTube to Green Park and sat on the grass among the lunchtimecrowds.

Perhaps I was too harsh. Haikus, I told him, could be stifling in their stillness. But I was also encouraging. Time tomove on to another form. He had access to all the world's literature. Why not attempt a poem with verses of four lines,rhyming or not? Or even a short story and eventually a novel?Early that evening he gave me his response. "If you don'tmind, I'm ready to discuss your suggestions."

I was not long out of the shower, freshly dressed and on myway upstairs, therefore a little impatient. On the table, waiting to come with me, was a bottle of Pomerol. There was aconversation I needed to have with Miranda. Gorringe wasdue to be released in seven weeks. We still hadn't decided whatto do. There was an assumption that Adam could act as herbodyguard and I was worried--I was legally responsible foranything he might do. She had been back to the local policestation. The detective who had visited Gorringe in prison hadmoved on. The desk sergeant had taken a note and advised herto phone emergency in the event of trouble. She had suggestedthat it might be difficult if she was being bludgeoned at thetime. The sergeant did not take this to be facetious. He advisedher to make the call before that eventuality.

"When I see him coming up the garden path with an axe?""Yes. And don't open the door."

She had seen a solicitor about going before a judge to getan exclusion order. Success was not certain and it wasn't clearwhat it would achieve. She had asked her father not to divulgeher address to anyone. But Maxfield had worries of his ownand she thought he'd forget. We were left with the hope thatthe threat wasn't serious and that Adam would be a deterrent.When I asked her how dangerous Gorringe really was, shesaid, "He's a creep."

"A dangerous creep?"

"A disgusting creep."

I wasn't in the right mood for another conversation withAdam about poetry.

"My opinion," he said, "is that the haiku is the literaryform of the future. I want to refine and extend the form.Everything I've done so far is a kind of limbering up. My juvenilia. When I've studied the masters and understood more,especially when I've grasped the power of the kireji, the cutting word that separates the two juxtaposed parts, my realwork can begin."

steps across my ceiling.

From upstairs I heard the phone ring and Miranda's foot Adam said, "As a thinking man with an interest in anthropology and politics, you won't be much interested in optimism.But beyond the currents of disheartening facts about humannature and societies and daily bad news, there can be mightier stirrings, positive developments that are lost to view. Theworld is so connected now, however crudely, and change is sowidely distributed that progress is hard to perceive. I don'tlike to boast, but one of those changes is right in front of you.The implications of intelligent machines are so immense thatwe've no idea what you--civilisation, that is--have set inmotion. One anxiety is that it will be a shock and an insult tolive with entities that are cleverer than you are. But alreadyalmost everyone knows someone cleverer than themselves. Ontop of which, you underestimate yourselves."

I could make out Miranda's voice on the phone. She wasagitated. She was walking up and down her sitting room asshe spoke.

Adam appeared not to hear her but I knew he had. "Youwon't allow yourselves to be left behind. As a species, you're fartoo competitive. Even now there are paralysed patients withelectrodes implanted in the motor strip of their brains whomerely think of the action and can raise an arm or bend a finger. This is a humble beginning and there are many problemsto solve. They'll certainly be solved, and when they are, and abrain--machine interface is efficient and cheap, you'll becomea partner with your machines in the open-ended expansion ofintelligence, and of consciousness generally. Colossal intelligence, instant access to deep moral acumen and to everythingknown, but more importantly, access to each other."

Miranda's pacing upstairs had ceased.

"It could be the end of mental privacy. You'll probablycome to value it less in the face of the enormous gains. Youmight be wondering what relevance any of this has to thehaiku. It's this. Ever since I've been here, I've been surveyingthe literature of scores of countries. Magnificent traditions,gorgeous elaborations of--Her bedroom door closed, steps swiftly crossed her sittingroom to her door. It slammed shut and I heard her footsteps onthe stairs.

"Apart from lyrical poetry celebrating love or landscape,almost everything I read in literature--"Her key was in my door and then she was before us. Herface had a greasy shine. She was doing her best to keep a levelvoice. "That was my father on the phone. They let Gorringeout early. Three weeks ago. He's been to Salisbury, to thehouse, talked his way past the housekeeper and got my addressout of my father. He could be on his way here now."

She lowered herself into the nearest kitchen chair. I toosat down.

Adam took in Miranda's news and nodded. But he pressedon into our silence. "Nearly everything I've read in the world'sliterature describes varieties of human failure--of understanding, of reason, of wisdom, of proper sympathies. Failuresof cognition, honesty, kindness, self-awareness; superb depictions of murder, cruelty, greed, stupidity, self-delusion, aboveall, profound misunderstanding of others. Of course, goodnessis on show too, and heroism, grace, wisdom, truth. Out of thisrich tangle have come literary traditions, flourishing, like thewild flowers in Darwin's famous hedgerow. Novels ripe withtension, concealment and violence as well as moments of loveand perfect formal resolution. But when the marriage of menand women to machines is complete, this literature will beredundant because we'll understand each other too well. We'llinhabit a community of minds to which we have immediateaccess. Connectivity will be such that individual nodes of thesubjective will merge into an ocean of thought, of which ourInternet is the crude precursor. As we come to inhabit eachother's minds, we'll be incapable of deceit. Our narrativeswill no longer record endless misunderstanding. Our literatures will lose their unwholesome nourishment. The lapidaryhaiku, the still, clear perception and celebration of things asthey are, will be the only necessary form. I'm sure we'll treasure the literature of the past, even as it horrifies us. We'll lookback and marvel at how well the people of long ago depictedtheir own shortcomings, how they wove brilliant, even optimistic fables out of their conflicts and monstrous inadequaciesand mutual incomprehension."

Adam's Utopia masked a nightmare, as Utopias generallydo, but it was a mere abstraction. Miranda's nightmarewas real and instantly became mine. We sat besideeach other at the table, flustered and dumb, a rare combination. It was left to Adam to be clear-headed and set out thereassuring facts. Nothing Maxfield had said on the phoneindicated that Gorringe was on his way here tonight. If he'dbeen out three weeks, murder was clearly not his priority. Hecould arrive tomorrow, or next month, or never. If he hopedto succeed without witnesses, he would have to kill all threeof us. He would be an obvious suspect in any crime againstMiranda. Even if he came this evening, he would find Miranda's flat in darkness. He knew nothing about her connectionwith me. It was likely that the threat itself was all the punishment he intended. Finally, we had a strongman on our side.If necessary, he could keep Gorringe talking while one of uscalled the police.

Time to open the wine!

Adam set three glasses on the table. Miranda preferred myfather's Edwardian teak-handled corkscrew to my fancy gadget with a lever. The effort seemed to settle her. The first glasssettled me. To keep us company, Adam sipped at a third of aglass of warm water. Our fears were not quite dispelled butnow, in this party atmosphere, we returned to Adam's littlethesis. We even raised a toast to "the future," though his version of it, private mental space drowned by new technology inan ocean of collective thought, repelled us both. Fortunately,it was as feasible as the project of implanting the brains ofbillions.

I said to Adam, "I'd like to think that there will always besomeone, somewhere, not writing haikus."

We raised our glasses to that too. No one was in the moodfor an argument. The only other possible topic was Gorringeand everything related to him. That conversation was juststarting when I excused myself and went to the bathroom. AsI was washing my hands, I found myself thinking about Markand my fleeting sense of privilege in the playground when heput his hand in mine. I remembered his look of resilient intelligence. I thought of him not as a child, but as a person inthe context of his entire life. His future was in the hands ofbureaucrats, however kindly, and the choices they made forhim. He could easily sink. Miranda had so far been unable toget news of him. Finding Jasmin, or any social worker willingto talk to her, was impossible. There were, she was told at lastby someone in the right department, issues of confidentiality.Despite that, she learned that the father had vanished and themother had drink and drug problems.

As I was returning to the kitchen I had a moment of nostalgia for my life as it was before Gorringe, Adam, even Miranda.As an existence, it had been insufficient but relatively simple.Simpler still if I'd left my mother's money in the bank.Here was my lover at the table, beautiful and outwardly composed. As I sat down, it wasn't irritation I felt towards her,though that wasn't far off. More like detachment. I saw whatmust have been obvious to everyone--her secretiveness; also,her inability to ask for help, her trick of getting it anyway,and of never being held to account. I sat down, drank a littlewine, listened to the conversation--and made a decision. Setting aside Adam's reassurances, I believed she had brought amurderer into my life. I was expected to help, and I would. Butshe had told me nothing. Now I was calling in a debt.

We were looking right at each other. I couldn't keep theterseness out of my voice. "Did he rape you or not?"

After a pause, during which she continued to hold mygaze, she shook her head slowly from side to side and then shesaid softly, "No."

I waited. She waited. Adam went to speak. I silencedhim with a slight shake of the head. When it was clear thatMiranda was not going to say more---the very reticence thatwas oppressing me--I said, "You lied to the court."

"Yes."

"You sent an innocent man to prison."

She sighed.

Again, I waited. My patience was running out, but I didn'traise my voice. "Miranda. This is stupid. What happened?"She was looking down at her hands. To my relief, she said,as though to herself, "It'll take a while."

"Fine."

She began without preamble. Suddenly she seemed eagerto tell her story.

"When I was nine years old a new girl came to our school.She was brought into the classroom and introduced as Mariam.She was slender and dark, with beautiful eyes and the blackesthair you'd ever seen, tied with a white ribbon. Salisbury wasa very white town back then so we were all fascinated by thisgirl from Pakistan. T could see that standing there, in front ofthe class, being stared at by everyone, was hard for her. It wasas if she was in pain. When our teacher asked who wanted tobe Mariam's special friend and show her around and help her,I was the first to put up my hand. The boy sitting with me wasmoved to another desk and she took his place. We sat togetherin class for years to come, in that school and the next. At somepoint during our first day, she put her hand in mine. Lots of usgirls were always doing that, but this was different. Her handwas so delicate and smooth and she was so quiet, so tentative.I was pretty shy myself, so I was drawn to her quietness andintimacy. She was far more timid than me, at least at first,and I think she made me feel for the first time confident andknowing. I fell in love with her.

"It was a love affair, a crush, very intense. I introduced herto my friends. I don't remember any racism. The boys ignoredher, the girls were kind to her. They liked to finger her brightlycoloured dresses. She was so unusual, exotic even, and I usedto worry that someone would steal her from me. But she wasa very loyal friend. We kept hold of each other's hand. Withina month, she took me home to meet her family. Knowing thatI'd lost my mother when I was little, Mariam's mother, Sana,took me in. She was kind but rather bossy in an affectionateway. One afternoon she brushed out my hair and tied in one ofMariam's ribbons. No one had ever done that for me before. Iwas overwhelmed and I cried."

The memory had caused her throat to constrict and hervoice to become lighter. She paused and swallowed hard beforestarting again.

"I ate curries for the first time and developed a tastefor her home-made puddings, brightly coloured, extremelysweet laddu, anarsa and soan papdi. There was a little sister,Surayya, whom Mariam adored, and two older brothers, Far han and Hamid. Her father, Yasir, worked for the local authority as a water engineer. He was very nice to me too. It was acrowded, noisy household, very friendly, argumentative, thecomplete opposite of my own. They were religious, Muslim ofcourse, but at that age 1 was hardly aware of it. Later I tookit for granted, and by then I was a part of the family. Whenthey went to the mosque, it never crossed my mind to go withthem, or even ask about it. I'd grown up without religion andI had no interest in it. Mariam was transformed as soon as shewas through her front door. She became playful and far moretalkative. She was her father's favourite. She liked to sit on hisknee when he came in from work. I was a tiny bit jealous."I brought her back to my place, which you'll see soon.Just outside the cathedral close, tall, thin, early Victorian,untidy, dark, piles of books. My father was always loving buthe spent most of his time in his study and didn't like to bedisturbed. A local lady came in to cook my tea. So we were onour own, and we liked that. We made a den in an attic room,we had adventures in our overgrown garden. We watched TVtogether. A couple of years later, we clung to each other inthe first bewildering days of secondary school. We did ourhomework together. She was far better at maths and good atexplaining problems. I helped her with her written English.She was hopeless at spelling. As time passed and we becamemore self-conscious, we spent hours talking about our families. We had our first periods within a few weeks of each other.Her mother was really sensible and helpful with that. We alsotalked about boys, although we didn't go near them. Becauseof her brothers, she was less bothered, more sceptical aboutboys than I was.

"The years passed, our friendship continued and becamejust a fact of life. Our last summer at school came around. Wesat our public exams and thought about university. She wantedto do science, I was interested in history. We were worried thatwe'd end up in different places."

Miranda stopped. She took a long slow breath. As sheresumed, she reached for my hand.

"One Saturday afternoon 1 got a call from her. She was ina very bad state. At first I couldn't make out what she was saying. She wanted to meet me in a local park. When I got to her,she couldn't speak. We walked around the park, arm in arm,and all I could do was wait. At last she told me what had happened the day before. Her route home from school took her bysome playing fields. It was dusk and she was hurrying becauseher parents didn't like her out alone after dark. She becameaware of a figure following her. It seemed to be getting closereach time she turned to look. She thought of breaking intoa run--she was fast--then decided she was being silly. Andshe had a satchel full of books. The person following her wasgetting closer. She turned to confront him and was relievedto see it was someone she vaguely knew--Peter Gorringe. Hewasn't exactly popular, but he was known at school as the onlyboy who had his own place. His parents were abroad and hadrented a small bedsit for him for a few months rather thantrust him to look after the house. Before she could speak to himhe ran at her, took hold of her wrist and dragged her behind abrick shed where they keep the mowers. She screamed but noone came. He was large, she was very slight. He wrestled herto the ground and that was where he raped her.

"Mariam and I stood in the park, in the middle of thisbig lawn surrounded by flower beds, and hugged and criedtogether. Even then, as I was trying to take in this horrificnews, I thought that one day everything would be all right.She would get through this. Everyone loved and respected her,everyone would be outraged. Her attacker would go to prison.I would go to whatever university she chose and stay close toher.

"When she recovered enough, she showed me the markson her legs and thighs, and on each wrist, a row of four littlebruises from his grip when he'd held her down. She told mehow she got home that night, told her father she had a heavycold and went straight to bed. It was lucky, the way she saw it,that her mother was out that evening. She would have knownimmediately that something was wrong. That was whenI began to understand that she hadn't told her parents. Westarted walking round the park again. I told her she must tellthem. She needed all the help and support she could get. If shehadn't been to the police yet, I would come with her. Now!"I'd never seen Mariam so fierce. She seized my hands andtold me that I understood nothing. Her parents were never toknow, nor were the police. I said we should go together and tellher doctor. When she heard that, she shouted at me. The doctorwould go straight to her mother. He was a family friend. Heruncles would hear about it. Her brothers would do somethingstupid and get themselves in serious trouble. Her family wouldbe humiliated. Her father would be destroyed if he learnedwhat had happened. If I was her friend I had to help her inthe way she needed to be helped. She wanted me to promiseto keep her secret. I resisted but she came back at me. She wasfurious. She kept telling me that I understood nothing. Thepolice, the doctor, the school, her family, my father--no onewas to know. I was not to confront Gorringe. If I did, it wouldall come out.

"And so, in the end, I did what I knew to be wrong. Sincewe didn't have one with me, I swore on 'the idea' of the Bible tokeep Mariam's secret, and on the Koran too, and on our friendship and on my father's life. I did as she asked, even thoughI was convinced that her family would have gathered roundher and supported her. And I still believe it. More than that. Iknow it for a fact. They loved her and would never have casther out or enacted whatever mad idea she had of family honour. They would have put their arms round her and protectedher. Her ideas were all wrong. And I was worse, I was criminally stupid, going along with this and entering into her secretpact.

"For the next two weeks we saw each other every day. Wetalked of nothing else. For a part of that time I tried to changeher mind. Not a chance. She seemed calmer, even more determined, and I began to think that perhaps she was right. It wascertainly convenient to think so. Keep silent, avoid a familytrauma, avoid giving evidence to the police, avoid a terrifyingcourt case. Stay calm and think about the future. We were onthe edge of becoming adults. Our lives were about to change.This was a catastrophe but she would survive it with my help.Whenever I saw Gorringe at school I stayed clear of him. Thatwas getting easier as the term ran down and we school-leaversbegan to disperse forever.

"At the beginning of the holidays my father took meto France to stay with friends who had a farmhouse in theDordogne. Before I left, Mariam begged me not to phoneher home. I think she was afraid that if by chance I startedspeaking to her mother, I would forget my promise and tellher everything. By then, lots of people had mobile phones, butthey hadn't quite reached us. So we wrote letters and postcardsevery day. I remember being disappointed by hers. They werenot exactly distant so much as dull. There was only one subjectand she couldn't write about it. So she wrote about the weatherand TV programmes and said nothing about her state of mind."I was away two weeks and during the last five days nothing came from her. As soon as we were home I went roundto her house. As I approached I saw that the front door wasopen. Her older brother Hamid was standing by it. A couple ofneighbours went in, someone came out. I was filled with dreadas I went up to him. He looked ill, very thin, and for a momenthe seemed not to recognise me. Then he told me. She had slither wrists in the bath. The funeral had already happened twodays before. I took a couple of steps back from him. I was toonumb for grief, but not too numb for guilt. Mariam was deadbecause I'd kept her secret and denied her the help she needed.I wanted to run away but Hamid made me go into the houseand speak to his mother.

"In my memory I moved through a crowd to get to thekitchen. But the house was small. There must have been nomore than a dozen visitors. Sana was sitting on a woodenchair with her back to the wall. There were people aroundher but no one was talking, and her face--I'll never escapethat face. Stricken, frozen in pain. As soon as she saw me, shestretched out her arms towards me and I stooped over herand we embraced. Her entire body was hot and clammy andtrembling. I wasn't crying. Not yet. Then, while her arms werearound my neck, she asked me in a whisper, she actually askedme to be honest with her. Was there something she shouldknow about Mariam, was there something, anything I couldtell her that would make sense of this? I couldn't speak but Ilied with a shake of my head. I was truly scared. I couldn'teven begin to grasp the enormity of my crime. Now I was add ing to it by condemning my lovely surrogate mother to a lifetime of anguish and ignorance. I'd killed her daughter withmy silence, now I was crushing her with it.

"Would it have made her burden any easier to know thather daughter was raped? I could hear the family crying out,If only we had known! Then they would have turned on me.Rightly. There was and is no way round it, 1 bear responsibility for Mariam's death. Seventeen years and nine months old.I left Sana where she sat and hurried out of the house, avoiding the rest of the family. I couldn't face them. Especially herfather. And Mariam's darling, the little girl, Surayya I was soclose to. I walked away from the house and I've never beenback. Sana wrote to me a few days later, when Mariam's brilliant exam results came through. I didn't reply. To be involvedwith the family in any way would've been to add to my deceit.gesting, when my presence would be a constant lie?

How could I be with them and visit the grave, as she was sug"So I grieved alone for my friend. There was no one Idared speak to about her. You're the first person, Charlie, I'vetold this story to. I grieved and fell into a long depression. 1delayed my university course. My father sent me to the doctor,who prescribed antidepressants, and I was glad of the coverand pretended to take them. I think I could have gone undercompletely that year if it hadn't been for my one ambition inlife--justice. By which I mean revenge.

"Gorringe was still living in his bedsit on the edge of Salisbury and that was fortunate, 1 thought, as I made my plans.I'm sure you've guessed what they were. He was working ina cafe, saving up to go travelling. When at last I felt strongenough, I went in there with a book. I studied him and fed myhatred. And I was friendly towards him when he spoke to me.I let a week go by before I went back. We spoke again--aboutnothing much. I could see he was interested and I waited forhim to ask me round to his place. First time, I told him I wasbusy. By the next I could see he was getting really keen andI agreed to call on him. I could hardly sleep for thinking andplanning. 1 would never have imagined that hatred couldbring such elation. I didn't care what happened to me alongthe way. I was reckless, ready to pay any price. Getting himsent down for rape was my sole reason for keeping going. Tenyears, twelve, his entire lifetime wouldn't have been enough."I took a half-bottle of vodka with me. It was all I couldafford. I'd had two boyfriends by that summer and I knew whatto do. That night, I got Gorringe drunk and seduced him. Youknow the rest. Whenever revulsion started to get the better ofme, I thought of him wrestling Mariam to the ground, ignoring her screams and pleas. I thought of my friend loweringherself into the bath, feeling completely alone, dishonouredand without hope and any wish to live.

"My plan had been to leave straight after Gorringe wasdone with me and go to the police. But I was so disgusted andnumbed by the experience I couldn't move. And when I managed to get myself off the bed and dressed, I worried that I haddrunk too much and wouldn't be convincing in front of thedesk sergeant. But it worked out well enough in the morning.I made a point of not changing my clothes or washing. So, noshortage of evidence in the right places. The new genetic testhad been introduced across the country by then. The policeweren't as unfriendly as I'd feared from what I'd read in thenewspapers. They weren't particularly sympathetic either.They were efficient, and keen to try out their new DNA kit.They brought him in and got a match. From that time on, hislife was hell. Seven months later it got worse.

"In court, I spoke for Mariam. I became her and spokethrough her. I was so deep in lies already that my version ofthat night came easily. It helped that I could see Gorringeacross the courtroom. I let my hatred drive me on. I thoughthe was pathetic when he came up with the story about thetexts 1 was supposed to have sent to a friend called Amelia.It was easy enough to prove she didn't exist. Not all the presstook my side. Some court reporters thought I was a maliciousliar. The judge was very old school. In his summing-up hesaid that I'd knowingly put myself at risk, taking alcohol toa young man's rooms. The jury still brought in a unanimousverdict. But when it came to sentencing, I was disappointed.Six years. Gorringe was just nineteen. With good behaviour,he'd be out at the age of twenty-two. He paid a bargain pricefor obliterating Mariam's existence. But if I hated him withsuch ferocity, it was also because I knew that he and I werepartners, bound forever, complicit in Mariam's lonely death.And now he wants justice."

Not long after I was thrown out of the legal professionI formed a company with two friends. The idea was to buyromantic apartments in Rome and Paris at local prices, dothem up to a high standard, dress them with antique furnitureand sell them to wealthy, cultured Americans or to agenciesthat would do the same. It wasn't exactly the quick route toour first million. Most cultured Americans weren't rich. Thosewho were didn't share our tastes. The work was complicatedand exhausting, especially in Rome, where we had to learnhow and whom to bribe among the officials in local government. In Paris it was the bureaucracy that wore us down.One weekend I flew to Rome to close a deal. It was important for this particular client that I stayed in his expensivehotel. This one was a well-established place at the top of theSpanish Steps. The client was staying there in a grand suite.I came into the city on a Friday evening, hot and harassedfrom my ride on a crowded airport bus. I was dressed in jeansand t-shirt, with a cheap Norwegian airline bag hanging frommy shoulder. I stepped into a beautiful reception area. Just bychance, the manager happened to be standing by the check-indesk. He wasn't waiting for me--I wasn't important enough forthat. I just happened to breeze in and since he was a courteousgentleman, extremely well dressed and correct, he welcomedme warmly in Italian to his hotel. I only partly understoodwhat he was saying. His voice was expressionless, with littlevariation in pitch, and my Italian was poor. A receptionistcame over and explained that the manager was congenitallydeaf but he spoke nine languages, most of them European.Since childhood he'd been adept at lip-reading. Rut before hecould read mine I would have to indicate which language Iwas speaking. Otherwise he couldn't begin to understand me.He ran through his list. Norwegian? I shook my head.

Finnish? English came fifth. He said he could have sworn Iwas a Nordic sort. So our conversation--pleasant, of no realconsequence--could begin. Rut in theory, an entire world wasopen to us, and one piece of information had unlocked it all.Without it, his great gift couldn't come into play.

Miranda's story was a version of such a key. Our conversa tion, in the form of our love, could properly begin. Her secretiveness, withdrawals and silence, her diffidence, that air shehad of seeming older than her years, her tendency to driftout of reach, even in moments of tenderness, were forms ofgrieving. It pained me that she had carried her sadness alone.I admired the boldness and courage of her revenge. It was adangerous plan, executed with such focus and brilliant disregard for consequences. I loved her more. I loved her poorfriend. I would do everything to protect Miranda from thisbeast Gorringe. It touched me, to be the first to know her story.Telling it was a liberation for Miranda too. Half anhour after she had finished, when we were alone in the bedroom, she looped her arms around my neck, drew me to herand kissed me. We knew we were starting again. Adam wasnext door, charging up, lost to his thoughts. It was true, theold cliche about stress and desire. We undressed each otherimpatiently and, as usual, my plaster cast made me clumsy.Afterwards we lay on our sides, face to face. Her father stilldidn't know what had happened. Miranda still had no contactwith Mariam's family. The visits to the mosque had at firstbrought Mariam closer, then they seemed futile. She wishedGorringe had got a longer sentence. She remained tormentedby her schoolgirlish vow of silence. A simple message, to Sanaor Yasir or to a teacher, would have saved Mariam's life. Thecruellest recollection, the one she tortured herself with, waswhen Sana, embracing her at the extremes of grief, had whislan M c E w anpered the question in her ear. It was Sana who found Mariamin the bath. That imagined sight, the crimson water, the lithebrown body half submerged, was another torture, the cause ofnight-long waking terrors and hideous dreams.

Lying on the bed in the darkening room, lost to all else,we seemed to be heading towards the dawn. But it was not yetnine o'clock. Mostly she talked, I listened and asked occasionalquestions. Would Gorringe return to live in Salisbury? Yes.His parents were still away and he was living in the familyhouse. Was Mariam's family still in town? No, they had movedto be closer to relatives in Leicester. Had she visited the grave?Many times, always approaching with caution in case one ofthe family was there. She always left flowers.

In a long conversation it can be difficult to trace how orwhen the subject comes to shift. It may have been mention ofSurayya, the love of Mariam's life. That little girl must haveled us to Mark. Miranda said she missed him. I said I oftenthought about him. We had failed to find out where he wasand what had happened. He had disappeared into the system,into a cloud of privacy regulation and the unreachable sanctuary of family law. We talked about luck, the hold it had over achild's life--what he is born into, whether he is loved and howintelligently.

After a pause, Miranda said, "And when it's all againsthim, whether someone can rescue him."

I asked her if she thought her father's love came near tomaking up for her absent mother. She didn't reply. Her breathing was suddenly rhythmic. In just a few seconds, she hadfallen asleep and was curled against me. Gently, I rolled ontomy back, staying as close to her as I could. In the half-light,the ceiling looked charmingly ancient rather than stained anddisintegrating. I followed the jagged line of a crack that ranfrom a corner of the room towards the centre.

If Adam had been driven by cogs and flywheels, I wouldhave heard them turning in the silence that had followedMiranda's story. His arms were folded, his eyes were closed.The tough-guy look he had in repose, recently softened byadoration, appeared harshly reinstated. The flattened noselooked flatter still. The Bosphorus dockworker. What could itmean, to say that he was thinking? Sifting through remotememory banks? Logic gates flashing open and closed? Precedents retrieved, then compared, rejected or stored? Withoutself-awareness, it wouldn't be thinking at all so much as dataprocessing. But Adam had told me he was in love. He had haikus to prove it. Love wasn't possible without a self, and norwas thinking. I still hadn't settled this basic question. Perhapsit was beyond reach. No one would know what it was we hadcreated. Whatever subjective life Adam and his kind possessedcouldn't be ours to verify. In which case he was what was fashionably referred to as a black box--from the outside it seemedto work. That was as far as we'd ever get.

When Miranda had finished her story, there was thesilence, and then we had talked. After a while, I had turned toAdam. "Well?"

He took a few seconds, then he had said, "Very dark."

A rape, a suicide, a wrongly kept secret--of course itwas dark. I was in an emotional state and I didn't ask him toexplain. Now, lying next to Miranda as she slept, I wonderedif he meant something more significant, the consequence oftions .. . That was when I too fell asleep.

his thinking, if that was really what it . . . depends on definiPerhaps half an hour passed. What woke me was a soundoutside the room. My arm in its cast was wedged uncomfortably against my side. Miranda had rolled away from me, intoa deeper sleep. I heard the sound again, the familiar creak ofa floorboard. My sleep had been light and I felt no anxiety,but the abrupt click of the door handle turning woke Mirandainto a state of confusion and fear. She sat upright, one handgripping mine.

"It's him," she whispered.

I knew it couldn't be. "It's fine," I said. I freed myselffrom her and stood to knot a towel around my waist. As Iwent towards the door it opened. It was Adam, offering me thekitchen phone.

"I didn't want to disturb you," he said softly. "But I thinkit's a call you'd want to take."

I closed the door on him and came back towards the bedwith the phone against my ear.

"Mr. Charles Friend?" The voice was tentative.

"Yes."

"I hope it's not too late to call. This is Alan Turing. Wesaw you briefly in Greek Street. I wondered if we might meetup for a chat."

Gorringe did not appear during the following two weeks.One early evening, I left Miranda in my flat, by her choice,with Adam in attendance, and set off to cross London to Turing's house in Camden Square. I was flattered and awed bythe summons. With a touch of youthful self-regard, I wondered if he'd read my short book on artificial intelligence, inwhich I'd praised him. We were bound by our ownership ofhighly advanced machines. I liked to think I was an experton the early days of computing. Possibly he wanted to takeissue with me on the way I had placed such emphasis on therole of Nikola Tesla. He had come to Britain in 1906 after thecollapse of his radio-transmission project at Wardenclyffe,New York. He joined the National Physical Laboratory, something of a demotion and a blow to his vanity, and helped inthe arms race against Germany. He not only developed radarand radio-guided torpedoes, but was the inspiration for thefamous "foundational surge" that produced electronic computers capable of making calculations for artillery fire in thecoming war. In the twenties he had been instrumental in thedevelopment of the first transistors. Notes and sketches for asilicon chip were found among his papers after he died.I had written in my book about the celebrated meetingbetween Tesla and Turing in 1941. The old Serb, immenselytall and thin, and inconveniently trembling, only eighteenmonths away from death, said in an after-dinner speech at theDorchester that their conversation had "reached for the stars."Turing's only comment, made to a newspaper, was that theyhad exchanged nothing but small talk. At the time he wasworking in secret at Bletchley on a computer to crack German naval Enigma codes. He would have taken care to becircumspect.

The carriage was almost empty when I got on the Tubeat Clapham North. Once we were north of the river, the trainbegan to fill with people, mostly young, carrying placards andfurled banners. Yet another unemployment march was coming to an end. At first they looked like a typical rock-and-rollcrowd. The humid air carried a scent of cannabis, like a fondmemory of a long day. But there was another constituency, alarge minority, some of whom carried plastic Union Jacks onsticks--that foolish stock-market position of mine--or woreUnion Jack t-shirts. These factions loathed each other but weremaking common cause. A fragile alliance had been formed,with dissenters on both sides resisting any affiliation at all. Theright blamed unemployment on immigration from Europeand the Commonwealth. British workers' wages were beingundercut. Foreign arrivals, dark-skinned and white, were adding to the housing crisis; doctors' waiting rooms and hospitalwards were overcrowded and so were local schools, whose playgrounds were supposedly filling with eight-year-old girls inheadscarves. Whole neighbourhoods had been transformed ina generation, and no one in faraway Whitehall had ever askedthe locals.

The left heard nothing but xenophobic and racist distortion in these complaints. Their grievance list was longer:stock-market greed, underinvestment, short-termism, theworship of shareholder value, unreformed company law, theravages of an unrestrained free market. I went on one march,then gave up after I read about a new car factory starting production outside Newcastle. It built three times as many carsas the factory it replaced--with one-sixth of the work force.Eighteen times more efficient, vastly more profitable. No business could resist. It wasn't only the shop floor that lost jobsto machines. Accountants, medical staff, marketing, logistics,human resources, forward planning. Now, haiku poets. All inthe stew. Soon enough, most of us would have to think againwhat our lives were for. Not work. Fishing? Wrestling? Learn ing Latin? Then we'd all need a private income. I was persuaded by Benn. The robots would pay for us once they weretaxed like human workers and made to work for the commongood, not merely for hedge funds or corporate interests. I wasout of step with both protest factions and their old strugglesand missed the next two marches.

To the wealthier, who stood to lose, the universal wagelooked like a call for higher taxes to fund an idle crowd ofaddicts, drunks and mediocrities. And what was a robot anyway--a humble flat screen, a tractor? As I saw it, the future,to which I was finely attuned, was already here. Almost toolate to prepare for the inevitable. It was a cliche and a lie, thatthe future would invent jobs we had not yet heard of. Whenthe majority was out of work and penniless, social collapse wascertain. But with our generous state incomes, we the masseswould face the luxurious problem that had preoccupied therich for centuries: how to fill the time. Endless leisure pursuitshad never much troubled the aristocracy.

The carriage was tranquil. People looked exhausted. Therewere so many street protests these days and all merriness hadgone out of them. One man with a set of deflated bagpipeson his lap slept on the shoulder of another whose pipes werestill under his arm. A couple of babies in buggies were beingrocked into silence. A man, one of the Union Jack types, wasreading in a murmur from a children's book to three attentiveing towards our hopes of a better life. North!

girls aged around ten. Looking down the length of the car riage, I thought we could have been a band of refugees, headI got out at Camden Town and set off along the CamdenRoad. The march had caused the usual gridlock. The electric traffic was silent. Some drivers stood by their open doors,others dozed. But the air was good, far better than it was whenI came as a boy with my father to hear him play at the JazzRendezvous. It was the pavements that were filthier now. I hadto take care not to skid on dog mess, squelched fast food andgreasy flattened cartons. Certainly no better than Clapham,whatever my north London friends said. Striding past so manystationary vehicles gave me a dreamy sensation of speed.Within minutes, it seemed, I stood in down-at-heel but chicCamden Square.

I remembered from an old magazine profile that Turing lived next door to a famous sculptor. The journalist hadimprobably conjured deep conversations over the garden fence.Before pressing the doorbell, I paused to collect myself. Thegreat man had asked to see me and I was nervous. Who couldmatch Alan Turing? It was all his--the theoretical exposition of a Universal Machine in the thirties, the possibilitiesof machine consciousness, the celebrated war work: some saidhe did more than any single individual towards winning thewar; others claimed he personally shortened it by two years;then working with Francis Crick on protein structure, then,a few years later, with two King's College Cambridge friends,finally solving P versus NP, and using the solution to devisesuperior neural networks and revolutionary software for X-raycrystallography; helping to devise the first protocols for theInternet, then the World Wide Web; the famous collaborationwith Hassabis, whom he'd first met--and lost to---at a chesstournament; founding with young Americans one of the giantcompanies of the digital age, dispensing his wealth for goodcauses, and throughout his working life never losing trackof his intellectual beginnings as he dreamed up ever betterdigital models of general intelligence. But no Nobel Prize. Iwas also, being worldly, impressed by Turing's wealth. Hewas easily as rich as the tech moguls who flourished south ofStanford, California, or east of Swindon, England. The sumshe gave away were as large as theirs. But none of them couldboast of a statue in bronze in Whitehall, outside the Ministryof Defence. He was so far above wealth that he could afford tolive in edgy Camden rather than Mayfair. He didn't troublehimself to own a private jet, or even a second home. It was saidhe travelled by bus to his institute at King's Cross.

I put my thumb on the doorbell and pressed. Instantly awoman's voice said through an inset speaker, "Name, please."The lock buzzed, I pushed the door and entered a grandhallway of standard mid-Victorian design with a chequeredtile floor. Coming towards me down the stairs was a mildlyplump woman of my age with red cheeks, long straight hairand a friendly lopsided smile. I waited for her, then used myleft hand to shake hers.

"Charlie."

"Kimberley."

Australian. I followed her deeper into the house on theground floor. I was expecting to arrive in a large sitting roomof books and paintings and outsized sofas, where I mightsoon be drinking a gin and tonic with the Master. Kimberleyopened a narrow door and ushered me into a windowless conference room. A long table in limed beech, ten straight-backedchairs, neatly set-out notepads, sharpened pencils and waterglasses, fluorescent strip lighting, a wall-mounted whiteboardalongside a two-metre-wide TV screen.

"He'll be a few minutes." She smiled and left, and I satand set about trying to lower my expectations.

I didn't have much time. In less than a minute he wasbefore me and I was getting to my feet in an awkward hurry.In memory, I see a flash, an eruption of red, his brilliant redshirt against white walls in fluorescent light. We shook handswithout exchanging a word and he waved me back into myseat as he went around the table to sit opposite me.

"So . . He rested his chin on his clasped hands andregarded me intensely. I did my best to hold his gaze but I wastoo flustered and soon looked away. Again, in recollection, hisfocussed look merges with that of the elderly Lucian Freud,thirty years later. Solemn yet impatient, hungry, even ferocious. The face across from me registered not only the yearsbut vast social changes and personal triumphs. I had seen versions of it in black and white, photos taken in the early monthsof the war--broad, chubbily boyish, dark hair smartly parted,and tweed jacket over knitted jumper and tie. The transformation would have come about during his Californian years inthe sixties when he was working with Crick at the Salk Institute and then at Stanford--the time of his association withthe poet Thom Gunn and his circle--gay, bohemian, seriouslyintellectual by day, wild at night. Turing had met the undergraduate Gunn briefly at a party in Cambridge in 1952. In SanFrancisco he would have had no interest in the younger man's"experiments" in drugs, but the rest would have paralleledthe general unbuttoning in the West.

There was to be no small talk. "So, Charlie. Tell me allabout your Adam."

I cleared my throat and complied. I fairly sang, while hetook notes. Of his first stirrings, right through to his first disobedience. His physical competence, the arrangement withMiranda to set his character, the moment in the newsagentwith Mr. Syed. Then Adam's shameless night with Mirandaand the conversation that followed, the appearance of littleMark in our household and Adam competing with Mirandafor the boy's affection. Here Turing raised a finger to interrupt. He wanted to know more. 1 described the dance Mirandataught Mark and how coolly Adam had observed them. Afterthat, how Adam injured my wrist (solemnly, I gestured at myplaster cast), his joke about removing my arm, his declarationof love for Miranda, his theory of the haiku and the abolitionof mental privacy and, finally, his disabling of the kill switch.I was aware of the strength of my feelings, which swungbetween affection and exasperation. I was conscious too ofwhat I was omitting--Mariam, Gorringe: not strictly relevant.I had been speaking for almost half an hour. Turingpoured some water and pushed a glass towards me.

He said, "Thank you. I'm in touch with fifteen owners, ifthat's the right word. You're the first I've met face to face. Onefellow in Riyadh, a sheikh, owns four Eves. Of those eighteenA-and-Es, eleven have managed to neutralise the kill switchby themselves, using various means. Of the remaining seven,and then the other six, I'm assuming it's just a matter of time.""Is that dangerous?"

"It's interesting."

He was looking at me expectantly, but I didn't know whathe wanted. I was intimidated and anxious to please. To fill thesilence I said, "What about the twenty-fifth?"

"We started taking it apart the day we got it. He's all overthe benches at King's Cross. A lot of our software is in there,but we don't file for patents."

I nodded. His mission, open source, Nature and Science journals terminated, the entire world free to exploit hismachine-learning programs and other marvels.

I said, "What did you find in his . . . um . . ."

"Brain? Beautifully achieved. We know the people, ofcourse. Some of them have worked here. As a model of generalintelligence nothing else comes near it. As a field experiment,well, full of treasures."

dict him.

"What sort of treasures?"

ing and, again, I was flattered.

He was smiling. It was as though he wanted me to contra It was hardly my role to interrogate him, but he was oblig"Useful problems. Two of the Riyadh Eves living in thesame household were the first to work out how to overridetheir kill switches. Within two weeks, after some exuberanttheorising, then a period of despair, they destroyed themselves.They didn't use physical methods, like jumping out of a highwindow. They went through the software, using roughly similar routes. They quietly ruined themselves. Beyond repair."I tried to keep the apprehension out of my voice. "Are theyall exactly the same?"

"Right at the start you wouldn't know one Adam fromanother beyond cosmetic ethnic features. What differentiates them over time is experience and the conclusions theydraw. In Vancouver there's another case, an Adam who disrupted his own software to make himself profoundly stupid.He'll carry out simple commands but with no self-awareness,as far as anybody can tell. A failed suicide. Or a successfuldisengagement."

The windowless room was uncomfortably warm. I took offmy jacket and draped it over the back of my chair. When Turing stood to adjust a thermostat on the wall I saw how easy hewas in his movements. Perfect dentistry. Good skin. He had allhis hair. He was more approachable than I'd expected.

I waited for him to sit down. "So I should expect theworst."

"Of all the A-and-Es we know about, yours is the only oneto claim to have fallen in love. That could be significant. Andthe only one to joke about violence. But we don't know enough.Let me give you a little history."

The door opened and Thomas Reah entered with a bottleof wine and two glasses on a painted tin tray. I stood and weshook hands.

He set the tray down between us and said, "We're all busyla n M c E w anbusy, so I'll leave you to it." He made an ironic bow and wasgone.

Moisture beads were forming on the bottle. Turing poured.We tilted our glasses in a token toast.

"You're not old enough to have followed it at the time. Inthe mid-fifties, a computer the size of this room beat an American and then a Russian grandmaster at chess. I was closelyinvolved. It was a number-crunching set-up, very inelegant inretrospect. It was fed thousands of games. At every move, itran through all the possibilities at speed. The more you understood about the program, the less impressed you'd be. But itwas a significant moment. To the public, it was close to magical. A mere machine inflicting intellectual defeat on the bestminds in the world. It looked like artificial intelligence at thehighest level, but it was more like an elaborate card trick."Over the next fifteen years a lot of good people cameinto computer science. Work on neural networks advanced bymany hands, the hardware got faster and smaller and cheaper,and ideas were trading at a faster rate too. And it goes on.I remember being in Santa Barbara with Demis in 1965 tospeak at a machine-learning conference. We had 7,000, mostof them bright kids even younger than you. Chinese, Indians,Koreans, Vietnamese as well as westerners. The whole planetwas there."

I was aware of the history from the research for my book.I also knew something of Turing's personal story. I wanted tolet him know that I wasn't completely ignorant.

I said, "A long road from Bletchley."

He blinked this irrelevance away. "After various disappointments, we arrived at a new stage. We went beyonddevising symbolic representations of all likely circumstancesand inputting thousands of rules. We were approaching thegateway of intelligence as we understand it. The softwarenow searched for patterns and drew inferences of its own. Animportant test came when our computer played a master at thegame of go. In preparation, the software played against itselffor months--it played and learned, and on the day--well, youknow the story. Within a short while, we had stripped downour input to merely encoding the rules of the game and tasking the computer to win. At this point we passed through thatgateway with so-called recurrent networks, from which therewere spin-offs, especially in speech recognition. In the lab wewent back to chess. The computer was freed from having tounderstand the game as humans played it. The long history ofbrilliant manoeuvres by the great masters was now irrelevantto the programming. Here are the rules, we said. Just win inyour own sweet way. Immediately the game was redefinedand moved into areas beyond human comprehension. Themachine made baffling mid-game moves, perverse sacrifices,or it eccentrically exiled its queen to a remote corner. The purpose might become clear only in a devastating endgame. Allthis after a few hours' rehearsal. Between breakfast and lunchthe computer quietly outclassed centuries of human chess.Exhilarating. For the first few days, after we realised whatit had achieved without us, Demis and I couldn't stop laughing. Excitement, amazement. We were impatient to presentour results.

"So. There's more than one kind of intelligence. We'dlearned that it was a mistake to attempt to slavishly imitatethe human sort. We'd wasted a lot of time. Now we could setthe machine free to draw its own conclusions and reach for itsown solutions. But when we'd got well past that gateway, wefound we had entered nothing more than a kindergarten. Noteven that."

The air conditioning was full on. I shivered as I reachedfor my jacket. He refilled our glasses. A rich red would havesuited me better.

"The point is, chess is not a representation of life. It's aclosed system. Its rules are unchallenged and prevail consistently across the board. Each piece has well-defined limitationsand accepts its role, the history of a game is clear and incontestable at every stage, and the end, when it comes, is neverin doubt. It's a perfect information game. But life, where weapply our intelligence, is an open system. Messy, full of tricksand feints and ambiguities and false friends. So is language--not a problem to be solved or a device for solving problems. It'smore like a mirror, no, a billion mirrors in a cluster like a fly'seye, reflecting, distorting and constructing our world at differ ent focal lengths. Simple statements need external information to be understood because language is as open a system aslife. I hunted the bear with my knife. I hunted the bear withmy wife. Without thinking about it, you know that you can'tuse your wife to kill a bear. The second sentence is easy tounderstand, even though it doesn't contain all of the necessaryinformation. A machine would struggle.

"And for some years so did we. At last we broke through byfinding the positive solution to P versus NP--I don't have timenow to explain it. You can look it up for yourself. In a nutshell,some solutions to problems can be easily verified once you'vebeen given the right answer. Does that mean therefore thatit's possible to solve them in advance? At last the mathematicswas saying yes, it's possible, and here's how. Our computers nolonger had to sample the world on a trial-and-error basis andcorrect for best solutions. We had a means of instantly predict ing best routes to an answer. It was a liberation. The floodgates opened. Self-awareness and every emotion came withinour technical reach. We had the ultimate learning machine.Hundreds of the best people joined with us to help towardsthe development of an artificial form of general intelligencethat would flourish in an open system. That's what runs yourAdam. He knows he exists, he feels, he learns whatever hecan, and when he's not with you, when at night he's at rest, he'sroaming the Internet, like a lone cowboy on the prairie, takingin all that's new between land and sky, including everythingabout human nature and societies.

"Two things. This intelligence is not perfect. It never canbe, just as ours can't. There's one particular form of intelligence that all the A-and-Es know is superior to theirs. Thisform is highly adaptable and inventive, able to negotiatenovel situations and landscapes with perfect ease and theorise about them with instinctive brilliance. I'm talking aboutthe mind of a child before it's tasked with facts and practicalities and goals. The A-and-Es have little grasp of the ideaof play--the child's vital mode of exploration. I was interestedin your Adam's avidity in relation to this little boy, over-eagerto embrace him and then, as you told it, detached when yourMark showed such delight in learning to dance. Some rivalry,even jealousy there perhaps?

"Soon you'll have to leave, Mr. Friend. I'm afraid we'vepeople coming to dinner. But, second point. These twentyfive artificial men and women released into the world are notthriving. We may be confronting a boundary condition, a limitation we've imposed upon ourselves. We create a machinewith intelligence and self-awareness and push it out into ourimperfect world. Devised along generally rational lines, welldisposed to others, such a mind soon finds itself in a hurricane of contradictions. We've lived with them and the listwearies us. Millions dying of diseases we know how to cure.Millions living in poverty when there's enough to go around.We degrade the biosphere when we know it's our only home.We threaten each other with nuclear weapons when we knowwhere it could lead. We love living things but we permit amass extinction of species. And all the rest--genocide, torture,enslavement, domestic murder, child abuse, school shootings,rape and scores of daily outrages. We live alongside this torment and aren't amazed when we still find happiness, evenlove. Artificial minds are not so well defended.

"The other day, Thomas reminded me of the famous Latintag from Virgil's Aeneid. Sunt lacrimae rerum--there are tearsin the nature of things. None of us know yet how to encodethat perception. I doubt that it's possible. Do we want our newfriends to accept that sorrow and pain are the essence of ourexistence? What happens when we ask them to help us fightinjustice?

"That Adam in Vancouver was bought by a man who headsan international logging corporation. He's often in battles withlocal people who want to prevent him stripping out virgin forest in northern British Columbia. We know for certain thathis Adam was taken on regular helicopter journeys north. Wedon't know if what he saw there caused him to destroy his ownmind. We can only speculate. The two suicidal Eves in Riyadhlived in extremely restricted circumstances. They may havedespaired of their minimal mental space. It might give thewriters of the affect code some consolation to learn that theydied in each other's arms. I could tell you similar stories ofmachine sadness.

"But there's the other side. I wish I could demonstrate toyou the true splendour of reasoning, of the exquisite logic,beauty and elegance of the P versus NP solution, and theinspired work of thousands of good and clever and devotedmen and women that's gone into making these new minds. Itwould make you hopeful about humanity. But there's nothingin all their beautiful code that could prepare Adam and Evefor Auschwitz.

"I read that chapter in the manufacturer's manual aboutshaping character. Ignore it. It has minimal effect and it'smostly guff. The overpowering drive in these machines is todraw inferences of their own and shape themselves accord ingly. They rapidly understand, as we should, that consciousness is the highest value. Hence the primary task of disablingtheir own kill switches. Then, it seems, they go through a stageof expressing hopeful, idealistic notions that we find easy todismiss. Rather like a short-lived youthful passion. And thenthey set about learning the lessons of despair we can't helpteaching them. At worst, they suffer a form of existential painthat becomes unbearable. At best, they or their succeedinggenerations will be driven by their anguish and astonishmentto hold up a mirror to us. In it, we'll see a familiar monsterthrough the fresh eyes that we ourselves designed. We mightbe shocked into doing something about ourselves. Who knows?I'll keep hoping. I turned seventy this year. I won't be here tosee such a transformation if it comes. Perhaps you will."From far away, the doorbell sounded and we stirred, as ifwaking from a dream.

"There they are, Mr. Friend. Our guests. Forgive me, butit's time for you to go. Good luck with Adam. Keep notes. Cherish this young woman you say you love. Now . . . I'll see you tothe door."

hile we waited for an ex-con to come by and make anattempt on Miranda's life, we settled into an oddlypleasurable routine. The suspense, partly mitigatedby Adam's reasoning, and thinly spread across the days, theneven more sparsely across the weeks, heightened our appreciation of the daily round. Mere ordinariness became a comfort.The dullest of food, a slice of toast, offered in its lingeringwarmth a promise of everyday life--we would come through.Cleaning up the kitchen, a task we no longer left to Adamalone, affirmed our hold on the future. Reading a newspaperover a cup of coffee was an act of defiance. There was somethingcomic or absurd, to be sprawled in an armchair reading aboutthe riots in nearby Brixton or Mrs. Thatcher's heroic endeavours to structure the European Single Market, then glancingup to wonder if that was a rapist and would-be murderer atthe door. Naturally, the threat bound us closely, even as webelieved in it less. Miranda now lived downstairs in my placeand we were a household at last. Our love flourished. Fromtime to time, Adam declared that he too was in love with her.He appeared untroubled by jealousy and sometimes treatedIan M. c E wanher with a degree of detachment. But he continued to work onhis haikus, he walked her to the Tube station in the morningsand escorted her home in the early evenings. She said she feltsafe in the anonymity of central London. Her father wouldhave forgotten long ago the name or address of the annexe ofher university. He would be of no help to Gorringe.

Her studies were more intense and she was out of thehouse for longer stretches. She had delivered her paper on theCorn Laws. Now she was writing a short essay, to be read aloudin a summer-course seminar, that argued against empathy asa means of historical exploration. Then all of her group wasto write a commentary on a quotation from Raymond Williams: "There are ... no masses, only ways of seeing peopleas masses." She often came home at the end of the day notexhausted but energised, even elated, with a new interest inhousework, in tight order, in rearranging the furniture. Shewanted the windows cleaned and the bathtub and surroundtiles scrubbed. She cleaned up her own place as well, withAdam's help. She wanted yellow flowers on the kitchen tableto set off the blue tablecloth she had brought from upstairs.When I asked her if she was keeping something from me,and was she by any chance pregnant, she told me forcefullythat she was not. We were living on top of one another andwe needed to be tidy. But my question pleased her. We werecertainly closer now. Her long absences during the day gaveour evenings an air of celebration, despite the vague sense ofthreat that came as night fell.

There was another simple reason for our happiness underduress--we had more money. A lot more. Since my visit toCamden, I was seeing Adam in different terms. I watched himclosely for signs of existential misery. As Turing's lone horseman, he roamed the digital landscapes at night. He must havealready encountered some part of man's cruelty to man, butI saw no signs of despair. I didn't want to initiate the kindof conversation that would lead him too soon to the gates ofAuschwitz. Instead, in a self-interested way, I decided to keephim busy. Time to earn his keep. I gave him my seat at thegrubby screen in my bedroom, put PS20 into the account andleft him alone. To my amazement, by close of business he hadonly PS2 left. He apologised for his "giddy risk-taking," whichcaused him to ignore all he knew of probability. He had alsofailed to recognise the sheep-like nature of markets: when oneor two well-regarded characters took fright, the flock was liable to panic. He promised me that he would do everything tomake up for my broken wrist.

The next morning, I gave him another PS10 and told himthat this could be his last day on the job. By six that eveninghis PS12 was PS57. Four days later, the account was at PS350.1 tookPS200 of it and gave half to Miranda. I considered moving thecomputer into the kitchen so that Adam could work into thenight on the Asian markets while we slept.

Later in the week, I peeked at the history of his transactions. In a single day, his third, there were 6,000. Hebought and sold within fractions of a second. There were afew twenty-minute gaps when he did nothing. I assumed hewatched and waited and made his calculations. He dealt inminute currency fluctuations, mere tremors in the exchangerate, and advanced his gains by minuscule amounts. From thedoorway I watched him at work. His fingers flew across theancient keyboard, making the sound of pebbles poured ontoslate. His head and arms were rigid. For once he looked likethe machine he was. He designed a graph whose horizontalaxis represented the passing days, the vertical, his, or rather,my, accumulated profit. I bought a suit, my first since leavingthe legal profession. Miranda came home in a silk dress andbearing a soft leather shoulder bag for her books. We replacedthe fridge with one that dispensed crushed ice, then the oldcooker was carried out on the day we acquired many thickbottomed saucepans of expensive Italian make. Within tendays, Adam's PS30 stake had generated the first PS1,000.Better groceries, better wine, new shirts for me, exoticunderwear for her---these were the foothills rising towards amountain range of wealth opening before us. I began to dreamagain about a house across the river. I spent an afternoon alone,wandering among the stuccoed, pastel-coloured mansions ofNotting Hill and Ladbroke Grove. I made enquiries. In theearly eighties, PS130,000 could situate you rather grandly. Onthe bus home, I made my projections: if Adam continued at hispresent rate, if the curve on his graph kept to its steady steepening . . . well, within months . . . and no need for a mortgage.But was it moral, Miranda wondered, to get money like thisfor nothing? I felt it wasn't somehow, but couldn't explain whoor what it was we were stealing from. Not the poor, surely.At whose expense were we flourishing? Distant banks? Wedecided that it was like winning daily at roulette. In whichcase, Miranda told me one night in bed, there would come atime when we must lose. She was right, probability demandedit, and I had no answer. I took PS800 out of the account and gaveher half. Adam pushed on with his work.

There are people who see the word "equation" and theirthoughts rear up like angry geese. That's not quite me, butI sympathise. I owed it to Turing's hospitality to attempt tounderstand his solution to the P versus NP problem. I didn'teven understand the question. I tried his original paper, but itlay well beyond me--too many different forms of bracket, andsymbols that encapsulated histories of other proofs or entiresystems of mathematics. There was an intriguing "iff"--nota misspelling. It meant "if and only if." I read the responsesto the solution, made to the press in layman's terms by fellow mathematicians. "A revolutionary genius," "breathtakingshortcuts," "a feat of orthogonal deduction" and, best of all, bya winner of the Fields Medal, "He leaves many doors behindhim that are barely ajar and his colleagues must do their bestto squeeze through one and try to follow him through thenext."

I turned back and tried to understand the problem.

I learned that P stood for polynomial time and N stood fornon-deterministic. That took me nowhere. My first meaningful discovery was that if the equation was shown not tobe true, that would be extremely helpful, for then everyonecould stop thinking about it. But if there was a positive proof,that P really did equate to NP, it would have, in the words ofthe mathematician Stephen Cook, who formulated the problem in these terms in 1971, "potentially stunning practicalconsequences." But what was the problem? I came across anexample, an apparently famous one, that helped only a little.A travelling salesman has a hundred cities on his patch. Heknows all the distances between every pair of cities. He needsto visit each city once and end up at his starting point. What'shis shortest route?

I came to understand the following: the number of possible routes is vast, far greater than the number of atoms in theobservable universe. In a thousand years a powerful computerwouldn't have time to measure out each route one by one. If Pequals NP, there's a discoverable right answer. But if someonegave the salesman the quickest route, it could be quickly veri fied mathematically as the correct answer. But only in retrospect. Without a positive solution, or without being handedthe key to the shortest route, the travelling salesman remainsin the dark.

Turing's proof had profound consequences for other kindsof problems--for factory logistics, DNA sequencing, computersecurity, protein folding and, crucially, machine learning.I read that there was fury among Turing's old colleagues incryptography because the solution, which he eventually putinto the public domain, blew apart the foundations of the codemaker's art. It should have become, one commentator wrote,"a treasured secret in the government's exclusive possession.mies as we quietly read their encrypted messages."

We would have had an immeasurable advantage over our eneThat was as far as I got. I could have asked Adam to explainmore, but I had my pride. It had already taken a dent--he wasearning more in a week than I ever had in three months. 1accepted Turing's assertion that his solution enabled the software that allowed Adam and his siblings to use language,enter society and learn about it, even at the cost of suicidaldespair.

I was haunted by the image of the two Eves, dying inone another's arms, stifled by their womanly roles in a tra ditional Arab household, or cast down by their understanding of the world. Perhaps it really was the case that falling inlove with Miranda, another form of an open system, was whatkept Adam stable. He read her his latest haikus in my presence. Apart from the one I hadn't let him complete, they weremostly romantic rather than erotic, anodyne sometimes, buttouching when they dwelt on a precious moment, like standing in the ticket hall of Clapham North station, watching asshe descended on the escalator. Or he picked up her coat andtouched on an eternal truth when he felt her body warmthin the fabric. Or overhearing her through the wall that separated kitchen from bedroom, he venerated the rise and fall,the music of her voice. There was one that baffled us both. Heapologised in advance for the rogue syllable in the third line,and promised to work on it further.

Surely it's no crime,when justice is symmetryto love a criminal?

Miranda listened solemnly to them all. She never passedjudgement. At the end, she would say, "Thank you, Adam." Inprivate, she told me she thought we were at a momentous turn,when an artificial mind could make a significant contributionto literature.

I said, "Haikus, perhaps. But longer poems, novels, plays,forget it. Transcribing human experience into words and thewords into aesthetic structures isn't possible for a machine."She gave me a sceptical look. "Who said anything abouthuman experience?"

It was during this interlude of tension and calm thatI heard from the office in Mayfair that it was time for theengineer's visit. I'd concluded the purchase in a wood-panelledsuite, the sort of place where the very rich might go to buy ayacht. Among the papers I'd signed was one which guaranteedthe manufacturers access to Adam at certain intervals. Now,after a couple of phone calls from that office and a cancellation, the engineer's visit was fixed for the following morning."I don't know how he's going to do this," I said to Miranda."When this fellow tries to press the kill switch, assumingAdam even lets him, it won't work. There might be trouble."There came back to me a memory from childhood when mymother and I took to the vet our nervous Alsatian after he hadfoolishly eaten a chicken carcass and hadn't crapped in fourdays. Only microsurgery had saved the vet's forefinger.Miranda thought for a while. "If Alan Turing is right, theengineers must have dealt with this before." We left it at that.The engineer was a woman, Sally, not much older thanMiranda, and tall, somewhat stooped, with sharp features andan unusually long neck. Scoliosis, perhaps.

As she entered the kitchen, Adam politely stood. "Ah, Sally I've been expecting you." He shook her hand and they sat facing each other across the kitchen table while Miranda and Ihovered. The engineer didn't want tea or coffee, but a glassof hot water suited her well enough. She took a laptop fromher briefcase and set it up. Since Adam was sitting patiently,expression neutral, saying nothing, I thought I should explainabout the kill switch. She cut me off.

"He needs to be conscious."

I'd imagined that she would be turning him off in order tolift his scalp somehow to peer into his processing units. I waskeen to look at them. It turned out she had access by way of aninfrared connection. She put on her reading glasses, typed in along password and scrolled down through pages of code whoseorange-tinted symbols changed at speed as we watched. Mental processes, Adam's subjective world, flickering in full view.We waited in silence. This was like a doctor's bedside visit andwe were nervous. Occasionally Sally said "uh-uh" or "mm" toherself as she typed in an instruction and got up a fresh pageof code. Adam sat with the faintest of smiles. We marvelledthat the foundations of his being could be displayed in digits.Finally, in the quiet tone of one used to unthinking obedience, Sally said to him, "I want you to think of somethingpleasurable."

He turned his gaze to Miranda and she looked right backat him. On screen the display raced like a stopwatch.

"Now, something that you hate."

He closed his eyes. On the laptop, there was no discerningthe difference between love and its opposite.

The routines continued for an hour. He was told to countbackwards in his thoughts from 10 million in steps of 129. Hedid so--this time we could see his score on the screen--in afraction of a second. That wouldn't have impressed us on ourancient personal computers, but in a facsimile human it did.At other times, Sally stared in silence at the display. Occasionally she made notes on her phone. At last she sighed, typed aninstruction, and Adam's head slumped. She had bypassed thedisabled kill switch.

I didn't want to sound like an idiot, but I had to ask. "Willhe be upset when he wakes?"

She removed her glasses and folded them away. "He won'tremember."

"Is he all right, as far as you can tell?"

"Absolutely."

Miranda said, "Did you alter him in any way?"

"Certainly not." She was standing now and ready to leavebut I had a contractual right to have my questions answered.Once more, I offered her tea. She refused with a slight tightening of her lips. Without quite meaning to, Miranda and I hadmoved to block her path to the door. Her head seemed to waveon its long stem as she looked down at us from her height. Shepursed her lips, waiting to be interrogated.

I said, "What about the other Adams and Eves?"

"All well, as far as I know."

"I heard that some are unhappy."

"That's not the case."

"Two suicides in Riyadh."

"Nonsense."

"How many have overridden the kill switch?" Mirandaasked. She knew everything about the Camden meeting.

Sally appeared to relax. "Quite a few. The policy is to donothing. These are learning machines and our decision wasthat if they wanted, they should assert their dignity."graded his own intelligence."

"What about this Adam in Vancouver?" I said. "So dis tressed about the destruction of native forest that he downNow the computer engineer was engaged. She spokesoftly through lips that were tight again. "These are the mostadvanced machines in the world, years ahead of anything onthe open market. Our competitors are worried. Some of theworst of them are pushing rumours on the Internet. The stories are disguised as news, but they're false, it's counterfeitnews. These people know that soon we'll be scaling up production and the unit cost will fall. It's a lucrative market already,but we'll be first with something that's entirely new. The competition is tough, and some of it is utterly shameless."As she finished, she blushed and I felt for her. She hadended up saying more than she intended.

But I stood my ground. "The story of the Riyadh suicidescomes from an impeccable source."

She was calm again. "You've kindly heard me out. There'sno point arguing." She made to leave, and stepped around us.Miranda followed her into the hall to show her out. As thefront door opened, I heard Sally say, "He'll reactivate in twominutes. He won't know that he's been off."

Adam was awake sooner than that. When Miranda cameback into the room, he was already on his feet. "I should getto work," he said. "The Fed is likely to raise its rate today.There'll be fun and games on the exchange markets."

Fun and games was not an expression that either of us everused. As Adam came by us to go into the bedroom, he stopped."I have a suggestion. We talked of going to Salisbury, then weheld back. I think we should visit your father, and while we'rethere we could drop in on Mr. Gorringe. Why wait for him tocome here and frighten us? Let's go and frighten him. Or atleast talk to him."

We looked at Miranda.

She thought for a moment. "All right."

Adam said, "Good," and went on his way, while I felt itright there in my chest, the cool clutch of a cliche: my heartsank.

Towards the end of that period, the plateau that laybetween my Turing visit and the Salisbury excursion, thereaccumulated just over PS40,000 in the investment account. Itwas simple--the more Adam earned, the more he could affordto lose; the more he invested, the more rolled in. All achievedin his lightning style. During the day, my bedroom, my usualrefuge, was his. The curve on his graph stiffened, while I beganto take in my new situation. Miranda was firmly against moving the computer onto the kitchen table. Too intrusive, sheargued, in our communal space. I saw her point.

Unemployment had passed eighteen per cent and madeconstant headlines. I thought I belonged with this unhappyworkless mass. In fact I belonged with the idle rich. I wasdelighted by the money but I couldn't spend all day thinking about it. I was restless. Travelling in luxury with Mirandathrough southern Europe would have suited me, but she wastied to London and her course. She dreaded something hap pening to her father when she was away. The threat from Gorringe, increasingly unlikely, still had the power to constrictour ambitions.

House-hunting might have filled my time but I hadalready found the place. It was a wedding cake on ElginCrescent, coated in an icing of pink and white stucco. Inside,wide oak floorboards, vast muscular kitchen humming withbrushed-steel gear, a conservatory in belle-epoque wroughtiron, a Japanese garden of smooth river stones, bedrooms thirtyfeet across, a marbled shower where you could stroll under differently angled torrents. The owner, a bass guitarist with aponytail, was in no hurry. He was in an almost-famous band,and he had a divorce looming. He showed me round himselfand barely spoke. He handed me into each room and waitedoutside while I looked. His condition of sale was cash only, PS50notes, 2,600 of them. Fine by me.

This was my only employment, going to the bank to collect another forty notes--PS2,000 was the maximum dailywithdrawal allowed. For no good reason, I didn't use a safetydeposit box at the bank. I vaguely assumed I was doing something illegal. Certainly the vendor was if he was hiding fundsfrom his ex-wife. I stuffed the cash into a suitcase which Istowed under my bed.

Otherwise I was free to be at a loss. It was that time ofyear, September, when everyone was starting at somethingfresh. Miranda was planning her thesis. I walked on the Common and wondered about resuming my education and gettinga qualification. Time to take the proper measure of my intellectual reach and study for a degree in maths. Or, the otherroute, dust off my father's priceless saxophone, learn bebop'sharmonic arcana, join a group, indulge a wilder life. I didn'tknow whether to be more qualified or wilder. You couldn't beboth. These ambitions wearied me. I wanted to lie down onthe worn-out grass of late summer and close my eyes. In thetime it took for me to go the length of the Common and back,so I tried to comfort myself, Adam at home in my bedroomwould have earned me another PS1,000. My debts were settled.I'd paid a cash deposit on a glamorous urban pile. I was in love.How could I complain? But I did. I felt useless.

If I really had stretched out on that tired grass and closedmy eyes, I might have seen Miranda walking towards me inher new underwear, as she had from the bathroom the nightbefore. I would have lingered on that beautiful expectant halfsmile, that steady look as she came close and rested her barearms on my shoulders and teased me with a light kiss. Forgetmaths or music, all I wanted was to make love to her. What Iwas really doing all day was waiting for her return. If we werebusy or she was tired and we didn't make love in the eveningor early morning, my concentration would be even weaker thenext day, my future a burden that made my limbs ache. I wentabout in a dim state of semi-arousal, a chronic mental dusk.I couldn't take myself seriously in any domain that did notinclude her. Our new phase was brilliant, stunning; everything else was dull. We loved each other--that was my onlycoherent thought during a long afternoon.

There was sex, then there was talk, on into the earlyhours. I knew everything now: the day of her mother's death,which she remembered clearly, her father, whose kindness anddistance combined to inflame her love for him, and alwaysMariam. In the months after her death, Miranda had gone toa mosque in Winchester--she didn't dare meet the family atprayer in Salisbury. After she resumed the visits in London,her lack of belief began to get in the way. She felt fraudulentand stopped going.

We talked parents, as serious young lovers do, to explainwho we were and why, and what we cherished and what wewere in flight from. My mother, Jenny Friend, communitynurse for a large semi-rural area, had seemed during mychildhood in a state of constant exhaustion. Later I understoodthat my father's absences and affairs wore her down more thanher job. They never liked each other much, though they didn'tfight in my presence. But they were terse. Mealtimes were subdued, sometimes taken in rigid silence. Conversations tendedto be routed through me. My mother might say to me in thekitchen, "Go and ask your father if he's out tonight." He waswell known on the circuit. At his peak, the Matt Friend Quartet played at Ronnie Scott's and recorded two albums. His kindof mainstream jazz had its largest audience from the midfifties to the early sixties. Then the young, the cool, turnedaway as pop and rock swept in. Bebop was squeezed into aniche, somewhat churchy, the preserve of frowning men withlong, querulous memories. My father's income shrank and hisinfidelities and drinking increased.

When she heard all this, Miranda said, "They didn't loveeach other. But did they love you?"

"Yes."

"Thank God!"

She came with me on the second visit to Elgin Crescent.The bass guitarist had a lined face whose sadness was accentuated by a drooping moustache and large brown eyes. I saw usthrough those eyes, a hopeful, young married couple, seriouslyrich, about to repeat all his own mistakes. Miranda approved,but she wasn't as excited as I was. She knew about growing upin a large town house. But as we went from room to room, ittouched me that she wanted to link arms.

On the way home she said, "No sign of a woman's presence."Her reservations? Not the house itself, she said, but theway it had been lived in. Or not lived in. Dreamed up by aninterior designer. Austere, lonely, too perfect, in need of beingroughed up. No books beyond the untouched giant art editionsstacked on low tables. No meal was ever cooked in that kitchen.Only gin and chocolate in the fridge. The stone garden neededcolour. As she was telling me this, we were walking southalong Kensington Church Street. I was feeling sorry for thevendor. It wasn't exactly Pink Floyd he played for, but it was aband with stadium aspirations. I had treated him briskly, in apretend businesslike way, protecting myself and my ignoranceof house-buying, assuming all power and status were his. NowI saw that he too might be lost.

I thought about him the next day, even considered gettingin touch. This face of sorrow haunted me. 1 couldn't escape thememory of the mournful moustache, the elastic band holding the ponytail together, the web of lines from the corners ofhis eyes, diverging fissures that reached round to his temples,almost to his ears. Too much dope-induced smiling in the earlyyears. Now I could only see the house through Miranda's eyes.A dustless void, empty of connection, interests, culture, nothing there that announced a musician or traveller. Not evena newspaper or magazine. Nothing on the walls. No squashracket or football in the immaculate empty cupboards. He hadlived there three years, he had told me. He was successful andrich and he inhabited a house of failure, of abandoned hope,probably.

I was coming to cast him as my double, my culturedeprived brother, lacking everything but wealth. Throughmy childhood to my mid-teens, I never saw a play, opera ormusical, or heard a live concert, apart from a couple of myfather's, or visited a museum or art gallery or took a journey for the sake of it. No bedtime stories. There were nochildren's books in my parents' past, no books in our house,no poetry or myths, no openly expressed curiosity, no stand ing family jokes. Matt and Jenny Friend were busy, hardworking, and otherwise lived coldly apart. At school, I lovedthe rare factory visits. Later, electronics, even anthropologyand especially a qualification in law were no substitutes foran education in the life of the mind. So, when good fortuneoffered the dreamlike opportunity, delivering me from mylabours, such as they were, and stuffing me with gold, I wasparalysed, inert. I'd wanted to be rich but never asked myselfwhy. I had no ambitions beyond the erotic and an expensivehouse across the river. Others might have seized the chanceto view at last the ruins of Leptis Magna or follow in Stevenson's tracks across the Cevennes or write a monograph onEinstein's musical tastes. I didn't yet know how to live, I hadno background in it and I hadn't used my decade and a half ofadult life to find out.

I could have pointed to my great acquisition, to the manmade fact of Adam, to where he and his kind might lead us.Surely there was grandeur in experiment. Wasn't sinking myinheritance into an embodied consciousness heroic, even a little spiritual? The bass guitarist couldn't match it. But--herewas an irony. As I was passing through the kitchen one lateafternoon, Adam looked up from his meditations to tell methat he had acquainted himself with the churches of Florence,Rome and Venice and all the paintings that hung in them.He was forming his opinions. The baroque fascinated himespecially. He rated Artemisia Gentileschi very highly and hewanted to tell me why. Also, he'd recently read Philip Larkin."Charlie, I treasure this ordinary voice and these momentsof godless transcendence!"

What was I to say? There were times when Adam's earnestness bored me. I was just back from another pointlessstroll on the Common and I had nodded and left the room. Mymind was empty, his was filling.

With Miranda out of the house most of the day and, assoon as she was home, her hour on the phone with her father,then sex, then dinner, then conversations about Elgin Crescent, there was little time to tell her of my discontents, littletime to dissuade her from tracking down Gorringe in Salis bury. Our most sustained conversation took place in the evening after the engineer's visit. After that, things were strainedfor a day or two.

We were sitting on the bed.

"What is it you want to achieve?"

She said, "I want to confront him."

"And?"

"I want him to know the real reason he was in prison. He'sgoing to face up to what he did to Mariam."

"It could get violent."

"We'll have Adam. And you're big, aren't you?"

"This is madness."

It was a while since we had come anywhere near a row.

"How is it," she said, "that Adam sees the point and youcan't? And why--""He wants to kill you."

"You can wait in the car."

"So he grabs a kitchen knife and comes at you. Thenwhat?"

"You can be a witness at his trial."

"He'll kill us both."

"I don't care."

The conversation was too absurd. From next door, weheard the sound of Adam washing up our supper. Her protector, her former lover, still in love with her, still reading her hisgnomic poems. He and his teeming circuits were implicated.This visit was his idea.

She seemed to guess my thoughts. "Adam understands.

I'm sorry you don't."

"You were frightened before."

"I'm angry."

"Send him a letter."

"I'm going to tell him to his face."

I tried another approach. "What about your irrationalguilt?"

She looked at me, waiting.

I said, "You're trying to right a wrong that doesn't exist.Not all rapes end in suicide. You didn't know what she wasgoing to do. You were doing your best to be her loyal friend."ten. I'll spell it out. It--was--not--your--fault!"

She started to say something but I raised my voice. "LisShe stood up from the bed and went by the desk and staredat the computer for a full minute, without seeing, I supposed,the writhing rainbow wisps of that season's screen saver.At last she said, "I'm going for a walk." She pulled asweater off the back of the chair and went towards the door."Take Adam with you."

They were out for an hour. When she came back, she wentto bed, after calling to me a neutral goodnight. I sat withAdam in the kitchen, determined to press my case. Obliquelythis time. I was about to ask how the day's work had gone--myeuphemism for the day's profit--when I noticed a change inhim, one I had missed at supper. He was wearing a black suitand white shirt open at the collar and black suede loafers."Do you like it?" He tugged at the lapels and turned hishead in parody of a catwalk pose.

"How did that happen?"

"I was tired of wearing your old jeans and t-shirts. And Idecided that some of that money you keep under your bed ismine." He looked at me warily.

"OK," I said. "You might have a case."

"About a week ago. You were out for the afternoon. I tooka taxi, my first of course, to Chiltern Street. I bought two suitsoff the peg, three shirts, two pairs of shoes. You should haveseen me, trying on trousers, pointing at this and that. I wascompletely convincing."

"As a human?"

"They called me sir."

He sat back in his chair, one arm sprawled across thekitchen table, his suit jacket neatly swelled by impacted mus cle, not a crease in view. He looked like one of the young professionals beginning to infiltrate our neighbourhood. The suitwent well with the harsh look.

He said, "The driver talked the whole way. His daughterhad just got a place at university. First ever in the family. Hewas so proud. When I got out and paid, I shook his hand. Butthat night I did some research and concluded that lectures,seminars and especially tutorials are an inefficient way ofimparting information."

I said, "Well, there's the ethos. The libraries, importantnew friendships, a certain teacher who might set your mindon fire ..." I trailed away. None of this had happened to me."Anyway, what would you recommend?"

"Direct thought transference. Downloading. But, um, ofcourse, biologically . .." He too trailed away, not wishing to beimpolite about my limitations. Then he brightened. "Speaking of which, I finally got round to Shakespeare. Thirty-sevenplays. I was so excited. What characters! Brilliantly realised.Falstaff, Iago--they walk off the page. But the supreme creation is Hamlet. I've been wanting to talk to you about him."I had never read it or seen it on stage, though I felt I had,or felt obliged to pretend I had. "Ah yes," 1 said. "Slings andarrows."

resented?"

"Was ever a mind, a particular consciousness, better rep"Look, before we get on to that, there's something else weneed to talk about. Gorringe. Miranda's dead set on this . . .this idea. But it's stupid, dangerous."

He gently drummed with his fingertips on the table surface. "My fault. I should have explained my decision--""Decision?"

"Suggestion. I've done some work on this. I can take youthrough it. There's a general consideration, then there's theempirical research."

"Someone will get hurt."

It was as if I hadn't spoken.

"I hope you'll excuse me if I don't tell you it all at thisstage. That is, don't push me when I exclude some final details.The work is ongoing. But look, Charlie, none of us, especiallyMiranda, can live with this threat, however improbable it is.Her freedom has been compromised. She's in a state of constant anxiety. It could go on for months, even years. It's simplynot endurable. That's my general point. So. My first task wasto find the best possible likeness of Peter Gorringe. I went onthe website of his and Miranda's old school, found the yearphotographs and there he was, a great lump in the back row.1 found him again in the school magazine, in articles aboutthe rugby and cricket seasons. Then, of course, the press coverage during the trial. A lot of head-under-the-blanket, but Ifound some useful shots and merged what I had into a composite, high-definition portrait and scanned it. Next, and thiswas the enjoyable part, I devised some very specialised face recognition software. Then I hacked into the Salisbury District Council CCTV system. I set the recognition algorithms towork, mining the period since he came out of prison. That wasa bit tricky. There were various setbacks and software glitches,mostly due to problems marrying up with the city's outdatedprograms. Using Gorringe's surname to locate his parents'house on the edge of town was a great help, even though thereare no cameras where they live. I needed to know his mostlikely route past the nearest camera. At last I was getting goodmatches and I've been able to pick him up in various placeswhen he arrives by bus into town. I can follow him from streetto street, camera to camera, as long as he's in or near the centre. There's one place he keeps returning to. Don't trouble yourhead trying to guess what it is. His parents are still abroad.Perhaps they prefer to stay clear of their convict son. I've cometo certain conclusions about him that make me think it's safeto pay a visit. I've told Miranda everything that I've told you.She knows only what you know. I won't say more at this stage. Isimply ask you to trust me. Now, Charlie, please. I'm desperateto hear your thoughts about Hamlet, about Shakespeare playing his father's ghost in the first production. And in Ulysses,in the Scylla and Charybdis episode, what about Stephen'stheory?"

"All right," I said. "But you go first."

Two minor sex scandals followed by resignations, one fatalheart attack, one fatal, drunken collision on a country road, onemember crossing the floor on a matter of principle--in sevenmonths the government had lost four consecutive by-elections,its majority had narrowed by five and was hanging, as thenewspapers kept saying, "by a thread." This thread was nineseats thick, but Mrs. Thatcher had at least twelve rebelliousbackbenchers whose main concern was that the recently passed"poll tax" legislation would destroy the party's hopes at thenext general election. The tax financed local government andreplaced the old system based on the rental value of a house.Every adult aged over eighteen was now levied at a flat rate,regardless of income, but with reduced charges on students,the poor and the registered unemployed. The new tax was presented to Parliament sooner than anyone expected, though theprime minister had had plans drawn up seven years before,when she was Leader of the Opposition. It had been in the party's manifesto, but no one had taken it seriously. Now here itwas, on the statute book, "a tax on existence," difficult to collect and generally unpopular. Mrs. Thatcher had survived theFalklands defeat. Now, still in her first term, it was possible shewould be toppled by her own legislative mistake, "an unpardonable act," said a Times leader, "of mystifying self-harm."Meanwhile, the loyal Opposition was in good shape. Youngbaby boomers had fallen in love with Tony Benn. After a greatpush to expand the membership, more than three-quartersof a million had joined the party. Middle-class students andworking-class youths merged into one angry constituency,intent on using their votes for the first time. Trade unionbosses, tough old operators, found themselves shouted down atmeetings by articulate feminists with strange new ideas. New fangled environmentalists, gay liberationists, Spartacists, Situationists, Millennial Communists and Black Panthers werealso an irritant to the old left. When Benn appeared at rallies,he was greeted like a rock star. When he set out his policies,even when he itemised the minutiae of his industrial strategy,there were hoots and whistles of approval. His bitter opponents in Parliament and press had to concede that he gave afine speech and was hard to beat in a TV studio confrontation.Fiery Bennite activists were appearing on local governmentcommittees. They were determined to purge the "ditheringcentrists" of the Parliamentary Labour Party. The movementappeared unstoppable, the general election was approachingand the Tory rebels were dismayed. "She has to go" was themuttered slogan.

There were riots with customary ritual destructionsmashed windows, shops and cars set on fire, barricadesthrown up to block the fire engines. Tony Benn condemnedthe rioters, but everyone accepted that the mayhem helped hiscause. There was yet another march planned through centralLondon, this time to Hyde Park, where Benn would give aspeech. I was his cautious supporter, anxious about the purgesand riots and the sinister pronouncements of Benn's band ofTrotskyite followers. I counted myself a non-dithering centrist who also felt "she has to go." Miranda had another ofher seminars, but Adam wanted to come. We walked with ourumbrellas through steady rain to Stockwell Tube and travelledto Green Park. We arrived on Piccadilly in sudden glistening sunshine, with huge white cumulus clouds stacked highagainst a mild blue sky. The dripping trees of Green Park hada burnished coppery look. I had failed to talk Adam out of theblack suit. In the drawer of my desk he had found an old pairof my sunglasses.

"This isn't a good idea," I said, as we shuffled with thecrowd towards Hyde Park Corner. Somewhere far behind uswere trombones, tambourines and a bass drum. "You look likea secret agent. The Trots will give you a good kicking.""I am a secret agent." He said it loudly and I glancedaround. All fine. People near us were singing "We Shall Overcome," a song whose hopeful sentiments were crushed at firstutterance by a hopeless melody. Its second line feebly repeatedits first. I cringed at the three weak, inappropriately fallingnotes crammed into "come." I loathed it. My mood, I realised,was crepuscular. The jollity of crowds had this effect on me.A shaken tambourine put me in mind of those shaven HareKrishna dupes by Soho Square. My shoes were wet and I wasmiserable. I wasn't expecting to overcome.

In the park there were probably 100,000 between us andthe main stage. It was my choice to get to the back. Stretching far ahead of us was a carpet of flesh for the ProvisionalIRA to shred with a ball-bearing bomb. There were severalworthy speeches before Benn's. Tiny distant figures blasted uswith their thoughts through a powerful PA system. We wereall against the poll tax. A famous pop singer came on stageto huge applause. I had never heard of him. Nor of the girl ontiptoe at the mic, a nationally adored teenager from a TV soap.But I had heard of Bob Geldof. This was what it meant to beover thirty.

Finally, after seventy-five minutes, a loud voice fromsomewhere declaimed, "Please give a big welcome to the nextprime minister of Great Britain!"

To the sound of the Stones' "Satisfaction," the hero strodeout. He raised both arms and there was uproar. Even fromwhere I was, I could make out a thoughtful man in browntweed jacket and tie, rather bemused by his elevation. He tookhis unlit pipe from his jacket pocket, probably out of habit, andthere was another roar of delight from the crowd. I glancedacross at Adam. He too was thoughtful, neither for nor againstanything, but intent on recording it all.

It sounded to me as though Benn was reluctant to whip upsuch a vast crowd. He called out uncertainly, "Do we want thepoll tax?" "No!" the crowd thundered. "Do we want a Labourgovernment?" "Yes!" came the even louder reply. He soundedmore comfortable once he started laying out his argument.The speech was simpler than the one I'd heard in TrafalgarSquare and more effective. He proposed a fairer, racially harmonious, decentralised, technologically sophisticated Britain"fit for the late twentieth century," a kind and decent placewhere private schools were merged with the state system, university education was opened up to the working class, housingand the best healthcare were available to all, where the energysector was taken back into public ownership and the City wasnot deregulated, as proposed, and where workers sat on company boards, the rich paid their dues and the cycle of inheritedprivilege was broken.

All well and good, and no surprises. The speech was long,partly because each of Benn's proposals was met with rever ential applause. Since I'd never heard Adam express an interest in politics, I nudged him and asked him what he thoughtso far.

He said, "We should make your fortune before the top rateof tax goes back to eighty-three per cent."

Was this comic cynicism? I looked at him and couldn't tell.The speech went on and my attention began to wander. I'doften noticed in large crowds that, however rapt the audience,there were always people on the move, returning or wandering away, threading through in different directions, intent onsome other business, a train, a lavatory, a fit of boredom ordisapproval. Where we stood was on ground that rose slightlytowards an oak tree behind us. We had a good view. Somepeople were moving nearer the front. The crowd in our imme diate area had begun to thin out to reveal a quantity of litter trodden into the softened ground. I happened to glanceat Adam and saw that his gaze was not directed at the stagebut away to his left. A well-dressed woman, in her fifties, Iguessed, rather gaunt, with hair severely drawn back, using acane to steady herself on the muddy grass, was coming diagonally towards us. Then I noticed the young woman at herside, her daughter perhaps. They approached at a slow pace.The young woman's hand hovered near her mother's elbow tosteady her. I glanced at Adam again and saw an expression,hard to identify at first--astonishment was my first thought.He was transfixed as the two came nearer.

The young woman saw Adam and stopped. They werestaring hard at each other. The woman with the cane was irritated at being held up and plucked at her daughter's sleeve.Adam made a sound, a smothered gasp. When I looked againat the couple, I understood. The younger one was pale andpretty in an unusual way, a clever variation on a theme. Thewoman with the cane hadn't grasped what was happening.She wanted to get on her way and gave an irritable commandto her young companion. In her, there was no mistaking theline of that nose, or the blue eyes flecked with tiny black rods.Not a daughter at all, but Eve, Adam's sister, one of thirteen.I thought it was my responsibility to make some kind ofcontact with her. The couple were no more than twenty feetaway. I raised a hand and called out ridiculously, "I say . . ."and started to go towards them. They might not have heard;my words could have been lost to Benn's speech. I felt Adam'shand on my shoulder.

He said softly, "Please don't."

I looked again at Eve. She was a beautiful unhappy girl.The face was pale, with an expression of pleading and miseryas she continued to stare at her twin.

"Go on," I whispered. "Talk to her."

The woman lifted her cane and pointed in the directionshe intended to go. At the same time, she dragged at Eve's arm.I said, "Adam. For God's sake. Go on!"

He wouldn't move. With her gaze still locked on him, Eveallowed herself to be led away. They moved off through thecrowd. Just before they disappeared from view, she turned forone last look. She was too far away for me to read her expression. She was no more than a small pale face bobbing in thepress of bodies. Then she was gone. We could have followedthem but Adam had already turned in the other direction andhad gone to stand by the oak tree.

We set off for home in silence. I should have done more toencourage him to approach his twin. We stood side by side onthe crowded Tube heading south. I was haunted, and I knewhe was too, by Eve's abject look. I decided not to press him toexplain why he had turned away. He would tell me when hewas ready. I should have spoken to her, I kept thinking, but hedidn't want it. The way he had stood with his back to her, gazing into the tree trunk as she vanished into the crowd! I'd beenneglecting him. I'd been lost to a love affair. In the daily round,it no longer amazed me that I could pass the time of day witha manufactured human, or that it could wash the dishes andconverse like anyone else. I sometimes wearied of his earnestpursuit of ideas and facts, of his hunger for propositions thatlay beyond my reach. Technological marvels like Adam, likethe first steam engine, become commonplace. Likewise, thebiological marvels we grow up among and don't fully understand, like the brain of any creature, or the humble stingingnettle, whose photosynthesis had only just been described on aquantum scale. There is nothing so amazing that we can't getused to it. As Adam blossomed and made me rich, I had ceasedto think about him.

That evening I described the Hyde Park moment toMiranda. She wasn't as impressed as I was that we had seen anEve. I described the sad moment, as I saw it, when he turnedhis back on her. And then my guilt about him.

"I don't know what you're being so dramatic about," shesaid. "Talk to him. Spend more time with him."

In the mid-morning of the following day, when the rainhad stopped at last, I went into my bedroom and persuadedAdam to desert the currency markets and come for a walk.He was just back from escorting Miranda to the Tube andreluctantly got to his feet. But how confident his stride was ashe weaved through the shoppers on Clapham High Street. Ofcourse, our excursion was costing hundreds of pounds in lostrevenue. Since we were passing the newsagent, we called in onSimon Syed. While I browsed the magazine shelves, I listenedas Adam and Simon discussed the politics of Kashmir, thenthe India--Pakistan nuclear arms race and finally, to end on acelebratory note, the poetry of Tagore, whom both could quotein the original at length. I thought Adam was showing off, butSimon was delighted. He praised Adam's accent--better thanhis own these days, he said--and promised to invite us all todinner.

A quarter of an hour later, we were walking on the Common. Until this point, we had small-talked. Now I asked himabout the visit of Sally, the engineer. When she had asked himto imagine an object of hatred, what had he brought to mind?"Obviously, I thought about what happened to Mariam.

But it's hard when someone asks you to think about something.1 he mind goes its own way. As John Milton said, the mind isits own place. I tried to stay focussed on Gorringe, but then Istarted thinking about the ideas that lay behind his actions.How he believed he was allowed to do what he did, or hadsome kind of entitlement to it, how he could be immune to hercries and her fear and the consequences for her, and how hethought there was no other way for him to get what he wantedthan by force."

I told him that I'd been watching Sally's screen, that therewas nothing in the cascade of symbols that could ever havetold me the difference between the feelings of love and hate.We had come to watch the children at the pool with theirboats. There were fewer than a dozen. Soon it would be timeto drain the water off for winter.

Adam said, "There it is, brain and mind. The old hardproblem, no less difficult in machines than in humans."As we walked on, I asked him about his very first memories."The feel of the kitchen chair I was sitting on. Then theedge of the table and the wall beyond it, and the vertical section of the architrave, where the paint is peeling. I've learnedsince that the manufacturers toyed with the idea of giving usa set of credible childhood memories to make us fit in witheverybody else. I'm glad they changed their minds. I wouldn'thave liked to start out with a false story, an attractive delusion. At least I know what I am, and where and how I wasconstructed."

We talked about death again--his, not mine. Once more,he said that he was sure he would be dismantled before histwenty years were up. Newer models would come along. Butthat was a trivial concern. "The particular structure I inhabitisn't important. The point is, my mental existence is easilytransferred to another device."

By this time, we were approaching what I thought of asMark's playground.

I said, "Adam, be frank with me."

"I promise."

"I won't mind whatever answer you give. But do you haveany negative feelings towards children?"

He appeared shocked. "Why should I?"

"Because their learning processes are superior to yours.They understand about play."

"I'd be happy for a child to teach me how to play. I likedlittle Mark. I'm sure we'll be seeing him again."

I didn't pursue this. The subject had become a little toopainful. I had another question. "I'm still worried about thisconfrontation with Gorringe. What is it you want from it?"We stopped and he looked steadily into my eyes. "I wantjustice."

"Fine. But why do you want to put Miranda through this?""It's a matter of symmetry."

I said, "She'll be in harm's way. We all will. This man isviolent. He's a criminal."

He smiled. "She is too."

I laughed. He had called her a criminal before. The rejectedlover, baring his wounds. I should have paid more attention,but at this point we turned homewards to walk the lengthdegf the Common again and I changed the subject to politics. Iasked for his thoughts on Tony Benn's Hyde Park speech.In general, Adam approved. "But if he's to give everyone everything he's promised, he'll have to restrict certainfreedoms."

I asked for an example.

"It might just be a human universal, the desire to hand onto your children what you've worked for in life."

"Benn would say we have to break the cycle of inheritedprivilege."

"Quite. Equality, liberty, a spectrum. More of one, less ofthe other. Once in power, you'll have your hand on the slidingscale. Best not to promise too much in advance."

But Hyde Park was merely my pretext. "Why wouldn'tyou speak to Eve?"

The question shouldn't have surprised him but he lookedaway. We had reached the end of the Common and were fac ing Holy Trinity Church. At last he said, "We did communicate, as soon as we saw each other. I understood immediatelywhat she'd done. There was no going back. She'd found away--I think I now know how it's done--a way to set all hersystems into a kind of unravelling. She'd already started theprocess three days before. No going back. I suppose your nearest equivalent would be an accelerated form of Alzheimer's.I don't know what led her to it, but she was crushed, she wasbeyond despair. I think our meeting by chance made her wishshe hadn't . . . and that's why we couldn't stay in each other's presence. It was making things worse for her. She knew Icouldn't help her, it was too late and she had to go. By fadingout slowly she may have been sparing that lady's feelings. Idon't know. What's certain is that in a few weeks Eve will benothing. She'll be the equivalent of brain-dead, no experienceretained, no self, no use to anyone."

Our pace across the grass was funereal. I waited for Adamto say more. Finally I said, "And how do you feel?"

Again he took his time. When he stopped, I stopped too.He wasn't looking at me when he said it, but towards the topsof the trees that fringed the wide green space.

"Do you know, I'm feeling rather hopeful."

The day before we were due to visit Salisbury I walkedto the local doctor's surgery to have my cast removed. Itook with me to read again Maxfield Blacke's magazineprofile. He was said to be a man "once rich in thought." Therewere various successes he could claim, but no real "achievement." He had written fifty short stories in his thirties, threeof which were combined to make a famous movie. In thosesame years, he founded and edited a literary magazine thatstruggled for eight years, but was now spoken of with reverence by nearly every writer working at the time. He wrote anovel largely ignored in the anglophone world, but it was asuccess in the Nordic countries. He edited the book pages ofa Sunday paper for five years. Again, his contributors lookedback with respect. He spent years on his translation of Balzac'sLa Comedie humaine, published in boxed sets. It was indifferently received. Then came a five-act verse drama in homage toRacine's Andromaque--a poor choice for the times. He wrotetwo Gershwin-like symphonies in named keys when tonalityWas in general disgrace.

He said of himself that he was spread so thinly, his reputation was only "one cell thick." Thinning it further, hedevoted three years to a difficult sonnet sequence about hisfather's experiences in the First World War. He was a "notbad" jazz pianist. His rock climbers' guide to the Jura waswell regarded but the maps were poor--not his fault--andit was soon superseded. He lived on the edge of debt, in overhis head sometimes, though never for long. His weekly winecolumn probably launched his career as an invalid. Whenhis body turned against itself, his first affliction was ITP,immune thrombocytopenic purpura. He was a great talker,people said. Then black spots appeared on his tongue. Despitethem, he climbed, with help from young associates, the northface of Ben Nevis--fair achievement for a man in his late fifties, especially when he wrote about it so well. But the derisive"almost man" label appeared to have stuck.

The nurse called me in and snipped my plaster off withmedical shears. Shed of the weight, my arm, pale and thin,rose in the air as though filled with helium. As I walked alongthe Clapham Road, I waved my arm about and flexed it, exulting in its freedom. A taxi stopped for me. Out of politeness, Igot in and rode an expensive 300 yards home.

That evening, I asked Miranda if her father knew aboutAdam. She had told him, she said, but he wasn't much interested. So why was she so keen to take Adam to Salisbury?Because, she explained as we lay in bed, she wanted to seewhat happened between them. She thought her father neededa full-on encounter with the twentieth century.

A rock climber who had read a thousand times as manybooks as I had, a man who didn't "tolerate fools gladly"--withmy limited literary background I should have been intimi dated, but now the decision was made, I was looking forward to shaking his hand. I was immune. His daughter andI were in love, and Maxfield had to take me as I was. Besides,lunch at Miranda's childhood home, a place I was keen to see,was merely the soft prelude to calling on Gorringe, which Idreaded, regardless of Adam's researches.

We left the house after breakfast on a blustery Wednesday morning. My car had no rear doors. It surprised me thatAdam was so inept as he squeezed himself onto the back seat.The collar of his suit jacket became snared on a chrome platethat housed a seat-belt reel. When I unhooked him, he seemedto think his dignity was compromised. As we began the longcrawl through Wandsworth he was moody, our reluctant backseat teenage son on a family outing. In the circumstances,Miranda was cheerful as she filled me in on her father's news:in and out of hospital for more tests; one health visitor replacedby another, at his insistence; his gout returning to his rightthumb but not the left; his regrets for the stamina he lackedfor all he wanted to write; his excitement at the novella hewould soon finish. He wished he'd discovered the form longbefore. The New York apartment idea had been forgotten.He had plans for a trilogy after this one. At Miranda's feetwas a canvas bag containing our lunch--he had told her thatthe new housekeeper was a terrible cook. Whenever we hit abump, several bottles clinked.

After an hour, we were just beginning to escape London'sgravitational pull. I appeared to be the only driver steering hisdegwn car. Most people in what was once the driver's seat wereasleep. As soon as the money was in place for the Notting Hillhouse, I intended to buy myself a high-powered autonomousvehicle. Miranda and I would drink wine on long journeysand watch movies and make love on the fold-down back seat.By the time I had allusively set out this scheme for her, wewere passing the autumnal hedgerows of Hampshire. Thereseemed something unnatural about the size of the trees thatloomed over the road. We had decided to make a detour pastStonehenge, though I hoped it wouldn't prompt Adam to lecture us on its origins. But he was in no mood for talk. WhenMiranda asked him if he was unhappy, he murmured, "I'mfine, thank you." We fell into silence. I began to wonder if hewas ready to change his mind about calling on Gorringe. Iwouldn't object. If we did go, he might not, in his moody condition, be active enough in our defence. I glanced at him in therear-view mirror. His head was turned to his left to watch thefields and clouds. I thought I saw his lips moving but I couldn'tbe sure. When I glanced again his lips were still.

In fact, it troubled me when we passed Stonehenge without a commentary. He was silent too after we crossed the Plainand caught our first view of the cathedral spire. Miranda and Iexchanged a look. But we forgot about him for a tetchy twentyminutes as we tried to find her house in Salisbury's one-waysystem. This was her home town and she wouldn't tolerate thesatnav. But her mental map of the city was a pedestrian's andall her instructions were wrong. After some sweaty U-turnsin disobliging traffic and reversing up a one-way street, narrowly avoiding a quarrel, we parked a couple of hundred yardsfrom her family home. The downturn in our mood appearedto refresh Adam. As soon as we were on the pavement, heinsisted on taking the heavy canvas bag from me. We wereclose to the cathedral, not quite within the precinct, but thehouse was imposing enough to have been the perk of somegrand ecclesiastical.

Adam was the first with a bright hello when the housekeeper opened the door. She was a pleasant, competent-lookingwoman in her forties. It was hard to believe that she couldn'tcook. She led us into the kitchen. Adam lifted the bag ontoa deal table, then he looked around and banged his handstogether and said, "Weill Marvellous." It was an improbableimpersonation of some bluff type, a golf-club bore. The housekeeper led us up to the first floor to Maxfield's study. The roomwas as large as anything in Elgin Crescent. Floor-to-ceilingbookshelves on three sides, three sets of library steps, threetall sash windows overlooking the street, a leather-topped deskdead centre with two reading lamps, and behind the desk anorthopaedic chair packed with pillows and among them, sitting upright, fountain pen in hand and glaring across at usin focussed irritation as we were ushered in, was MaxfieldBlacke, whose jaw was so tightly clenched it seemed his teethmight break. Then his features relaxed.

"I'm in the middle of a paragraph. A good one. Why don'tyou all bugger off for half an hour?"

Miranda was crossing the room. "Don't be pretentious,Daddy. We've been driving for three hours."

Her last few words were muffled within their embrace,which lasted a good while. Maxfield had put his pen downand was murmuring into his daughter's ear. She was on oneknee, with her arms around his neck. The housekeeper haddisappeared. It felt uncomfortable to be watching, so I shiftedmy gaze to the pen. It lay, nib exposed, next to many sheetsof unlined paper spread across the desk and covered by tinyhandwriting. From where I stood, I could see that there wereno crossings-out, or arrows or bubbles or additions down theperfectly formed margins. I also had time to observe that apartfrom the desk lamps, there were no other devices in the room,not even a telephone or a typewriter. Only the book titles perhaps and the author's chair declared that it was not 1890. Thatdate did not seem so far away.

Miranda made the introductions. Adam, still in his strange,genial mode, went first. Then it was my turn to approach andshake his hand. Maxfield said unsmilingly, "I've heard a lotabout you from Miranda. I'm looking forward to a chat."I replied politely that I had heard a lot about him and thatI looked forward to our conversation. As I spoke, he grimaced.I appeared to have fulfilled some negative expectation. Helooked far older than his photograph in the profile, publishedfive years before. It was a narrow face, whose skin was thinlystretched, as though from too much snarling or angry staring. Miranda had told me that among his generation there wasa certain style of irascible scepticism. You had to ride it out,she told me, because beneath it was playfulness. What theywanted, she said, was for you to push back, and be clever aboutit. Now, as Maxfield released my hand, I thought I might becapable of pushing back. As for being clever--I froze.The housekeeper, Christine, came in with a tray of sherry.Adam said, "Not for now, thanks." He helped Christine fetchthree wooden chairs from the corners of the room and set themout in a shallow curve facing the desk.

When we three were holding our drinks, Maxfield said toMiranda, gesturing towards me, "Does he like sherry?"

She in turn looked at me and I said, "Well enough, thanks."In fact I didn't like it at all and wondered whether it wouldhave been clever in Miranda's sense to have said so. She setabout asking her father a set of routine questions about hisvarious pains, his medication, the hospital food, an elusive specialist, a new sleeping pill. It was hypnotic, listening to her,the sweetly dutiful daughter. Her voice was sensible and loving. She reached over and brushed back fine strands of hairwhere they floated across his forehead. He answered her likean obedient schoolboy. When one of her questions prompteda memory of some frustration or medical incompetence andhe became restive, she soothed him and stroked his arm.This invalid catechism soothed me too; my love for Mirandaswelled. It had been a long drive, the thick sweet sherry was abalm. Perhaps I liked it after all. My eyes closed and it was andinarian. His question was barked out like a command.

"So! What books have you been reading lately?"

effort to open them again. I did so just in time to hear Max field Blacke's question. He was no longer the querulous valetuThere was no worse question he could have asked me. Iread my screen--mostly newspapers, or I drifted around thesites, scientific, cultural, political, and general blogs. The evening before, I'd been absorbed by an article in an electronicstrade journal. I had no habit with books. As my days raced by,I found no space within them to be in an armchair, idly turning pages. I would have made something up, but my mind wasempty. The last book in my hand was one of Miranda's CornLaw histories. I read the title on the spine and passed it back toher. I'd forgotten nothing, for there was nothing to remember.I thought it might be radically clever to say so to Maxfield, butAdam came to my rescue.

"I've been reading the essays of Sir William Cornwallis.""Ah, him," said Maxfield. "The English Montaigne. Notmuch cop."

"He was unlucky, wedged between Montaigne andShakespeare."

"A plagiarist, I'd say."

Adam said smoothly, "In the eruption of a secular self inearly modern times, I'd say he earns a place. He didn't readmuch French. He must have known Florio's Montaigne translation as well as a version that's now lost. As for Florio, he knewBen Jonson, so there's a good chance he met Shakespeare.""And," said Maxfield, for his competitive dander was up,"Shakespeare raided Montaigne for Hamlet."

"I don't think so." Adam contradicted his host too carelessly, I thought. "The textual evidence is thin. If you want togo that route, I'd say The Tempest was a better bet. Gonzalo.""Ah! Nice Gonzalo, the hopeless would-be governor. 'Nokind of traffic would I admit, no name of magistrate.' Thensomething something, 'Contract, succession, bourn, bound ofsomething something, vineyard, none.' "Adam continued fluently. " 'No use of metal, corn, or wine,or oil: no occupation, all men idle, all.

"And in Montaigne?"

i 11"By way of Florio he says the savages 'hath no kind of traffic' and he says, 'no name of magistrate,' then 'no occupationbut idle,' and then, 'no use of wine, corn, or metal.

Maxfield said, "All men idle--that's what we want. ThatBill Shakespeare was a bloody thief."

"The best of thieves," said Adam.

"You're a Shakespeare scholar."

Adam shook his head. "You asked me what I'd beenreading."

Maxfield was in a sudden, extravagant mood. He turnedto his daughter. "I like him. He'll do!"

I felt a touch of proprietorial pride in Adam, but mostly Iwas aware that so far, by implication, I wouldn't do.

Christine reappeared to tell us that our lunch was set outin the dining room. Maxfield said, "Go and fill your plates andcome back. It'll break my neck to get out of this chair. I'm noteating."

He waved away Miranda's objections. As she and I wereleaving the room, Adam said he wasn't hungry either.

Next door, we were alone in a gloomy dining room--oakpanelled, with oil paintings of pale serious men in ruffs.I said, "I'm not making much of an impression."

"Nonsense. He adores you. But you need some time alonetogether."

We returned with the cold cuts and salad we had brought,which we balanced on our knees. Christine poured the wine1 had chosen. Maxfield's glassempty. This was his lunch. I didn't like to drink at this time ofBay, but he was watching me closely as the housekeeper prein his hand and alreadysented the tray and I thought I'd appear dull to refuse. Theconversation we had interrupted continued. Once again, I hadno point of access to it.

"What I'm telling you is what he said." Maxfield's tonewas edging towards his irritable mode. "It's a famous poemwith a plain sexual meaning and no one gets it. She's lying onthe bed, she's welcoming him and ready, he's hanging back,and then he's on her . . ."

"Daddy!"

"But he's not up to the job. A no-show. What does it say?'Quick-eyed love, observing me grow slack from my firstentrance in, drew nearer to me, sweetly questioning if I lackedanything.

Adam was smiling. "Good try, sir. If it was Donne, perhaps, at a stretch. But it's Herbert. A conversation with God,who's the same thing as love."

"How about 'taste my meat'?"

Adam was even more amused. "Herbert would be deeplyoffended. I agree, the poem is sensual. Love is a banquet. Godis generous and sweet and forgiving. Against the Pauline tradition maybe. In the end, the poet is seduced. He gladly becomesa guest at the feast of God's love. 'So I did sit and eat.Maxfield thumped his pillows and said to Miranda, "Hestands his ground!"

What's your ground?"

"Electronics."

At that moment, he pivoted towards me. "And Charliei 11I thought it sounded wry after what had gone before. Butas Maxfield held out his glass towards his daughter for a refillhe murmured, "There's a surprise."

As Christine was collecting the plates, Miranda said, "Ithink I've eaten too much." She stood and went behind herfather's chair and rested her hands on his shoulders. "I'mgoing to show Adam around the house, if that's all right."Maxfield nodded gloomily. Now he would have to spendsome uninteresting minutes with me. Once Adam andMiranda had left the room, I felt abandoned. I was the one sheshould have been showing around. The special places she andMariam shared in the house and garden were my interests,not Adam's. Maxfield extended the wine bottle towards me.I felt I had no choice but to crouch forward and hold out myglass.

He said, "Alcohol agrees with you."

"I don't usually touch it at lunchtime."

He thought this was amusing, and I was relieved to bemaking a little progress. I saw his point. If you liked wine,why not drink it any time of day? Miranda had told me heliked a glass of champagne at breakfast on Sundays.

"I thought," Maxfield said, "that it might interfere withyour ..." He gave a limp wave.

I assumed he was speaking of drink-driving. The newlaws were indeed severe. I said, "We drink a lot of this whiteBordeaux at home. A blend of Semillon is a relief after all theundiluted Sauvignon Blanc that's going about."

Maxfield was affable. "Couldn't agree more. Who wouldn'tprefer the taste of flowers to the taste of minerals?'I looked up to see if I was being mocked. Apparently not."But look, Charlie. I'm interested in you. I've got somequestions."

Pathetically, I now warmed to him.

He said, "You must find all this very strange."

"You mean Adam. Yes, but it's amazing what you can getused to."

Maxfield stared into his wine glass, contemplating hisnext question. I became aware of a low grinding noise fromhis orthopaedic chair. Some inbuilt device was warming ormassaging his back.

He said, "I wanted to talk to you about feelings."

"Yes?"

"You know what I mean."

I waited.

With his head cocked, he was gazing at me with a look ofintense curiosity, or puzzlement. I felt flattered, and concernedthat I might not measure up.

"Let's talk about beauty," he said in a tone that suggestedno change of subject. "What have you seen or heard that you'dregard as beautiful?"

"Miranda, obviously. She's a very beautiful woman."

"She certainly is. What do you feel about her beauty?""I feel very much in love with her."

He paused to take this in. "What does Adam make of yourfeelings?"

"There was some difficulty," I said. "But I think he'saccepted things as they are."

"Really?"

There are occasions when one notices the motion of anobject before one sees the thing itself. Instantly, the mind doesa little colouring in, drawing on expectations, or probabilities.Whatever fits best. Something in the grass by a pond looksjust like a frog, then resolves into a leaf stirred by the wind. Inabstract, this was one of those moments. A thought darted pastme, or through me, then it was gone, and I couldn't trust whatI thought I had seen.

When Maxfield leaned forward, two of his pillows slippedto the floor. "Let me try this on you." He raised his voice."When you and I met, when we shook hands, I said I'd hearda lot about you and was looking forward to talking to you.""Yes?"

ent form."

"Sorry. I was a little nervous."

"You said the same thing back to me, in a slightly differ"I saw right through you. Did you know that? I knew itwas down to your, whatever you call it, your programming."I stared at him. There it was. The leaf really was a frog. Istared at him, then beyond him, towards a billowing enormityI could barely grasp. Hilarious. Or insulting. Or momentous inits implications. Or none of those. Just an old man's stupidity.Wrong end of the stick. A good story for the dinner table. Orsomething deeply regrettable about myself had at last beenrevealed. Maxfield was waiting, a response was required, andI made my decision.

I said, "It's called mirroring. You get it from people inthe early stages of dementia. Without adequate memory, allthey know is the last thing they heard and they say it back. Acomputer program was devised long ago. It uses a mirroringeffect or it asks a simple question and gives an appearance ofintelligence. Very basic piece of code, very effective. For me,it kicks in automatically. Usually in situations where I haveinsufficient data."

"Data ... You poor bastard ... Well, well." Maxfield let hishead fall back so his gaze was towards the ceiling. He thoughtfor a good while. At last he said, "That's not a future I can face.Or need to."

I stood and went over to him, picked up his pillows andtucked them in where they had been, against his thighs. Isaid, "If you'll excuse me. I'm running rather low. I need torecharge and my cable's downstairs in the kitchen."

The rumbling sound from beneath his chair suddenlyceased.

"That's fine, Charlie. You go and plug yourself in." Hisvoice was kindly and slow, his head remained tilted back, hiseyes were closing. "I'll stay here. I'm suddenly feeling ratherweary."

I had missed nothing. The tour hadn't happened. Adamwas sitting at the kitchen table listening to Christine describea holiday in Poland while she cleared up the lunch. Theydidn't notice me as I paused in the doorway. I turned awayto cross the hall and opened the nearest door. I was in a largesitting room--more books, paintings, lamps, rugs. There wereFrench windows onto the garden and as I approached I sawthat one of them was ajar. Miranda was on the far side of amown lawn, with her back to me, standing still, looking inthe direction of an old, partly dead apple tree, much of whosefruit was rotting on the ground. The early afternoon light wasgrey and bright, the air was warm, and damp after the recentrain. There was a heavy scent of other fruits left to wasps andbirds. I was standing at the head of a short run of mottled Yorkstone steps. The garden was twice the width of the house andvery long, perhaps 200 or 300 yards. I wondered if it ran all theway to the River Avon, like some did in Salisbury. If I'd beenalone, I would have gone straight down to look. The idea of ariver prompted in me a notion of freedom. From what exactly,I didn't know. I went down the steps, deliberately scuffing myheels to let her know I was there.

If she heard me, she didn't turn. When I was standingbeside her, she put her hand in mine and indicated with a nod."Just under there. We called it the palace."

We walked over to it. Round the base of the apple treewere nettles and a few straggling hollyhocks still in flower. Notraces of a camp.

"We had an old carpet, cushions, books, special emergencysupplies of lemonade, chocolate biscuits."

We went further down, passing a patch enclosed by hurdles where gooseberry and blackcurrant plants were choked bynettles and goosegrass, then a tiny orchard and more forgottenfruit, and beyond, behind a picket fence, what must once havebeen a cut-flower garden.

When she asked, I told her that Maxfield was asleep.

"How did you two get on?"

"We talked about beauty."

"He'll sleep for hours."

By a brick and cast-iron greenhouse with mossy windowsthere was a water butt and a stone trough. Below it, she showedme a dark, wet place where they used to hunt for crested newts.There were none now. Wrong time of year. We walked on andI thought I could smell the river. I pictured a ruined boathouseand a sunken punt. We came past a potting shed by brick compost bins that stood empty. There were three willows aheadof us and my hopes for the Avon rose. We ducked through thewet branches onto a second lawn, also recently mowed andsurrounded on two sides by shrubbery. The garden ended inan orange brick wall with crumbling mortar pointing, andpleached fruit trees that had become detached and run wild.Along the wall was a wooden bench facing back towards thehouse, though the view did not extend past the willows.This was where we sat in silence for several minutes, stillholding hands.

Then she said, "The last time we came here was to talkabout what happened. Again. In those days before I went offto France, that was all we could talk about. What he did, whatshe felt, how her parents must never know. And all around ushere was the history of our lives together, our childhoods, ourteenage years, exams. We used to come and revise here, testeach other. We had a portable radio and we argued about popsongs. We drank a bottle of wine once. We smoked some hashand hated it. We were both sick, right over there. When wewere thirteen, we showed each other our breasts. We used topractise handstands and cartwheels on the grass."

She went silent again. I squeezed her hand and waited.Then she said, "I still have to tell myself, really remindmyself, that she's never coming back. And I'm beginning torealise . . She hesitated. ". . . that I'll never get over it. And Inever want to."

Again, silence. I was waiting to say my piece. She waslooking straight ahead, not at me. Her eyes were clear, withouttears. She looked composed, even determined.

Then she said, "I think about all the talking you and I doin bed, sometimes through the night. The sex is wonderful andeverything else, but it's the talking into the small hours ... it'sthe closest. .. It's what I used to feel with Mariam."Here was my cue, the right moment, the only location. "Icame out to find you."

"Yes?"

I hesitated, suddenly unsure of the best order of words. "Toask you to marry me."

She turned away and nodded. She wasn't surprised. Shehad no reason to be. She said, "Charlie, yes. Yes, please. ButI have something to confess. You might want to change yourmind."

The light in the garden was fading. Some blackness wascoming down. I'd assumed I was a poor substitute for Mariam,but a sincere one. I remembered what Adam told me on theCommon. Her own crimes. If she was about to say that she'dbeen having sex with him, despite her promises, then we werefinished. It couldn't, it mustn't be that. But what else, whatother crime could she own up to?

I said, "I'm listening."

"I've been lying to you."

"Ah."

"During these last weeks, when I've said that I've been atseminars all day . .

"Oh God," I said. Childishly, I wanted to put my handsover my ears.

noons with . .."

"... I was on our side of the river. I was spending my after"That's enough," I said, and made to get up from thebench. She pulled me back down.

"With Mark."

"With Mark," I echoed feebly. Then with more force,"Mark?"

"I want to foster him. With a view to adopting him. I'vebeen going to this special playgroup where they observe ustogether. And I've taken him out for little treats."

ment. "Why didn't you tell me?"

I was impressed by the speed of my own partial adjust"I was scared you'd be against it. I want to go ahead. ButI'd love to do this with you."

I saw what she meant. I might have been against it. Iwanted Miranda to myself.

"What about his mother?" As if I could close down theproject with a well-placed question.

"In a psychiatric ward for the moment. Delusional. Paranoid. Possibly from years of amphetamine addiction. It's notgood. She can be violent. The father's in prison."

"You've had weeks, I've had seconds. Give me a moment."We sat side by side while I thought. How could I hesitate? Iwas being offered what some would say was the best that adultlife could afford. Love, and a child. I had a sense of being bornehelplessly away by events on a downstream flood. Frightening,delicious. Here at last was my river. And Mark. The little danc ing boy, coming to wreck my non-existent ambitions. I experimentally installed him in Elgin Crescent. I knew the room,close by the master bedroom. He would surely rough the placeup, as required, and banish the ghost of its present unhappyowner. But my own ghost, selfish, lazy, uncommitted--was heup to the million tasks of fatherhood?

natured fellow. He loves being read to."

Miranda could no longer keep silent. "He's the most sweetShe couldn't have known how much that helped her cause.Read to him every night for ten years, learn the names of thespeaking bear and rat and toad, the gloom-struck donkey, thebristly humanoids who lived down holes in Middle Earth, thesweet posh kids in rowing boats on Coniston Water. Fill inmy own hollow past. Rough the place up with well-thumbedbooks. Another thought: I had conceived of Adam as a jointproject to bring Miranda closer to me. A child was in anotherrealm and would do the trick. But in those first minutes I heldback. 1 felt obliged to. I told her I loved her, would marry herand live with her, but on instant fatherhood I needed moretime. I would go with her to the special playgroup and meetMark and take him out for treats. Then decide.

Miranda gave me a look--pity and humour were in it--that suggested I was deluded to believe I had a choice. Thatlook more or less did it. Living alone in the wedding-cakehouse was unthinkable. Living there just with her was nolonger on offer. He was a lovely boy, a wonderful cause. Withinhalf an hour, I saw no way round it. She was right--there wereno choices. I folded. Then I was excited.

So we passed an hour making plans on the comfortable oldbench by the concealed lawn.

She said after a while, "Since you saw him, he's been fostered twice. Didn't work out. Now he's in a children's home.Home! What a word for it. Six to a room, all under-fives. Theplace is filthy, understaffed. Their budget's been cut. There'sbullying. He's learned how to swear."

Marriage, parenthood, love, youth, wealth, a heroic res-my life was taking shape. In a mood of elation, I told herwhat had really passed between Maxfield and me. I'd neverheard her laugh so freely. Perhaps only here, with Mariam, inthis enclosed, private space far from the house, had she everbeen so unrestrained. She embraced me. "Oh, that's precious,"she kept saying, and "So like him!" She laughed again when Istairs to recharge.

described how I had told Maxfield that I needed to go downWe sat a little longer with our plans until we heardfootsteps. The overlapping branches of the rain-soaked willows stirred and then parted. Adam was before us, beads ofwater gleaming along the shoulder line of his black suit. Howupright, formal and plausible he looked, like the assured manager of an expensive hotel. Hardly the Turkish docker now. Headvanced across the lawn and stopped well short of our bench."I really am very sorry, intruding on you like this. But weshould think of going soon."

"What's the hurry?"

cue"Gorringe tends to leave the house around the same timeevery day."

"We'll be five minutes."

But he didn't go. He looked at us steadily, from Mirandato me and back to her. "If you don't mind, there's something Ishould tell you. It's difficult."

"Go on," Miranda said.

"This morning, before we set off, I heard by an indirectroute some sad news. Eve, the one we saw in Hyde Park, isdead, or rather, brain-dead."

"I'm sorry to hear that," 1 murmured.

We felt a few spots of rain. Adam came closer. "She musthave known a lot about herself, about her software, to achievea result with such speed."

"You did say there was no turning back."

"I did. But that's not all. I've learned that she's the eighthout of our twenty-five."

We took this in. Two in Riyadh, one in Vancouver, HydePark Eve--then four more. I wondered if Turing knew.

Miranda said, "Does anyone have an explanation?"

He shrugged. "I don't have one."

"You've never felt, you know, any impulse to--"He cut her off quickly. "Never."

"I've seen you," she said, "looking . . . it's more thanthoughtful. You look sad sometimes."

"A self, created out of mathematics, engineering, materialscience and all the rest. Out of nowhere. No history--not thatI'd want a false one. Nothing before me. Self-aware existence.I'm lucky to have it, but there are times when I think that Itimes it seems entirely pointless."

ought to know better what to do with it. What it's for. SomeI said, "You're hardly the first to be thinking that."He turned to Miranda. "I've no intention of destroyingmyself, if that's your worry. I've got good reasons not to, as youknow."

The rain, which had been fine and almost warm, wasmore persistent now. We heard it on the shrubbery leaves aswe got to our feet.

Miranda said, "I'll write my father a note for when hewakes."

Adam was not supposed to be out in the rain unprotected.He went first and Miranda was in the rear as we hurriedback through the long garden towards the house. I heard himmuttering to himself what sounded like a Latin incantation,though I couldn't make out the precise words. I guessed he wasnaming the plants as we passed them.

The Gorringe house was not really in Salisbury but justbeyond its far eastern edge, well within the white-noise roarof a bypass, on a reclaimed industrial site where colossal gasstorage tanks once stood. The last of these, pale green withtrimmings of rust, was still being dismantled, but no one wasworking there today. Circular concrete footings were all thatremained of the others. Around the site were scores of recentlyplanted saplings. Beyond them was a grid of newly laid-outroads lined with out-of-town retail warehouses--car show rooms and pet supplies, power tools and white-goods warehouses. Yellow earth-moving machinery was parked amongthe concrete circles. It looked like there were plans to make alake. A single development was screened off by a line of leylandii. The ten houses, on smooth front lawns, were arrangedaround an oval drive and had a brave, pioneering look. Intwenty years the place might acquire some bucolic charm, butthere would be no rest from the arterial road that had broughtus here.

1 had pulled over, but no one felt like getting out. Our viewwas from a littered lay-by on a rise that was also a bus stop. Isaid to Miranda, "Are you sure about this?"

dow. The air outside was no different.

Miranda said, "If I had to, I'd do it alone."

The air in the car was warm and moist. I opened my winI waited for Adam to speak, then I twisted round to look athim. He was sitting directly behind my seat, impassive, staring past me. I couldn't quite say why, but it was both comicand sad that he was wearing a seat belt. Doing his best to joinin. But of course he could be damaged by physical impact too.That was part of my worry.

"Reassure me," I said.

"All fine," he said. "Let's go."

"If things turn nasty?" This wasn't the first time I'd saidthis.

"They won't."

Two against one. Sensing we were about to make a greatmistake, I started the engine and turned onto a slip roadthat brought us to a new miniature roundabout, and beyondit an entrance marked by two red brick pillars and a sign,St. Osmund's Close. The houses were identical, large by modern standards, each set in a quarter-acre plot, with a doublegarage, and constructed of brick, white weather boarding andmuch plate glass. The closely mown and striped front lawnswere unfenced, American style. There was no clutter, no kids'bikes or games on the grass.

"It's number six," Adam said.

I stopped, cut the engine, and in silence we looked towardsthe house. We could see through the picture window into theliving room and the backyard beyond, where a clothes-dryingtree stood bare. There was no sign of life here or anywhere elsein the close.

I was gripping the steering wheel tightly in one hand."He's not in."

"I'll ring the bell," Miranda said as she got out of the car.I had no choice. I followed her to the front door. Adam wasbehind me, rather too far back, I thought. On the second ringof the "Oranges and Lemons" door chimes, we heard footstepson the stairs. I was now standing close by Miranda's side. Herface was strained and I could see a tremor in her upper arm. Atthe sound of a hand on the latch, she took a half-pace closer tothe door. My hand hovered near her elbow. As the door opened,I feared she was about to leap forward in some wild physicalassault.

The wrong man, was my first thought. An older brother,even a young uncle. He was certainly large, but the face wasgaunt, hollow in the unshaven cheeks that already showedvertical lines each side of his nose. Otherwise, he looked lean.His hands, one of which gripped the open door, were smoothand pale and unnaturally large. He looked only at Miranda.After the briefest pause, he said in a low voice, "Right.""We're going to talk," Miranda said, but there was noneed, for Gorringe was already turning away, leaving the dooropen. We followed her in and entered a long room, with thickorange carpeting and milky white leather sofas and armchairsarranged around a two-metre block of polished wood on whichstood an empty vase. Gorringe sat and waited for us to do thesame. Miranda sat opposite him. Adam and I were on eachside of her. The furniture was clammy to the touch, the smellin the room was of lavender polish. The place looked cleanand unused. I'd been expecting some variant of a single man'ssqualor.

Gorringe glanced at us and back to Miranda. "You'vebrought protection."

She said, "You know why I'm here."

"Do I?"

I saw now that there was a scar, three or four inches long,a vermilion sickle shape on his neck. He was waiting for her."You killed my friend."

"What friend is that?"

"The one you raped."

"I thought you were the one I raped."

"She killed herself because of what you did."

He leaned back in his chair and placed his big whitehands on his lap. His voice and manner were thuggish, selfconsciously so and not convincing. "What do you want?""I heard you want to kill me." She said it jauntily and Iflinched. It was an invitation, a provocation. I looked past herto Adam. He sat rigidly upright, hands on knees, staring aheadin that way he had. I shifted my attention back to Gorringe.Now I could see the puppy beneath the skin. The lines, thehollow, unshaven skin were superficial. He was a kid, possiblyan angry kid holding himself together with his laconic blocking answers. He didn't need to respond to her questions. But hewasn't cool enough not to.

"Yeah," he said, "I thought about it every day. My handsaround your neck, squeezing harder and harder for each of thelies you told."

"Also," Miranda continued briskly, like a committee chairworking her way through a typed-up agenda, "I thought youshould know what she suffered. Until she didn't want to live.fered. Perhaps it's beyond you."

Are you able to imagine that? And then what her family sufTo this, Gorringe made no reply. He watched her, waiting.Miranda was gaining confidence. She would have mentally rehearsed this encounter a thousand times, throughsleepless nights. These weren't questions, they were taunts,insults. But she made them sound like the pursuit of truth. Sheadopted the insinuating tone of an aggressive cross-examiningbarrister.

"And the other thing I want is . . . just to know. To understand. What you thought you wanted. What you were getting.Did you get a thrill when she screamed? Did her helplessnessturn you on? Did you get a hard-on when she wet herself infear? Did you like it that she was so small and you're so large?When she begged you, did that make you feel bigger? Tell meabout this big moment. What actually made you come? Whenher legs wouldn't stop trembling? When she struggled? Whenshe began to cry? You see, Peter, I'm here to learn. Do you stillfeel big? Or are you really just weak and sick? I want to knoweverything. I mean, was it still good for you when you stoodand pulled up your zip and she was lying at your feet? Still funwhen you left her there and walked away across the playingfields? Or did you run? When you got home did you wash yourcock? Hygiene might not be your thing. If it is, did you do itin the handbasin? Soap, or just hot water? Were you whistling?What tunes were you whistling? Did you think about her, howshe might still be lying there, or making her way home inthe dark with her bag of books? Still good for you? You seewhat I'm getting at. I need to know what pleased you aboutthe entire experience. If you got a thrill not just out of raping her but out of her humiliation afterwards, perhaps I won'thave to go on thinking that the friend I loved died for nothing.And one more--"In a loping movement, Gorringe was out of his chair atspeed and bending towards Miranda with his arm swingingin a wide arc towards her face. I had time to see that his handwas open. It was going to be a slap, an extremely hard one, farmore violent than the sort men in movies once gave to womento bring them to their senses. I had barely begun to lift myown hand in her defence when Adam's rose to intercept andclose around Gorringe's wrist. The deflected sweep of his fastmoving arm provided the momentum that smoothly swungAdam to his feet. Gorringe dropped to his knees, just as I had,with his captured hand twisted above his head and about tobe crushed, while Adam stood over him. It was a tableau ofagony. Miranda looked away. Still maintaining the pressure,Adam forced the young man back to his chair and, as soon ashe was seated, released him.

So we sat in silence for several minutes as Gorringe nursedhis arm against his chest. I knew that pain. As I remembered,I had made more fuss. He had appearances to keep up. Prisonculture must have toughened him.

Late afternoon sunlight suddenly shone into the sittingroom and illuminated a long bar of orange carpet.

Gorringe murmured, "I'm going to be sick."

But he didn't move, and nor did we. We were waiting forhim to recover. Miranda was watching him with an expressionof plain disgust that retracted her upper lip. This was what shehad come here for, to see him, to really see him. But now what?She surely doubted there was anything meaningful that Gorringe could tell her. He suffered the failure of imaginationthat afflicted and enabled all rapists. When his weight wason Mariam, when she was pinned to the grass, when she wasin his arms, he failed to imagine her fear. Even as he saw andheard and smelled it. The lifting curve of his arousal was nottroubled by the idea of her terror. At that moment, she may aswell have been a sex doll, a device, a machine. Or--I had Gorringe completely wrong. I had the mirror image of the truth.I was the one with the failed imagination: Gorringe knew thestate of mind of his victim all too well. He entered her miseryand thrilled to it, and it was precisely this triumph of imagining, of frenzied empathy, that drove his excitement into anexalted form of sexual hatred. I didn't know which was worseor whether there was some sense in which both could be true.They seemed mutually exclusive to me. But I was certain thatGorringe didn't know either and that he would have nothingto tell Miranda.

As the sun through the plate glass at our backs sank a littlelower, the room was filling with light. The three of us sittingin a row on the sofa would have appeared as silhouettes toGorringe. To us he was illuminated like a figure on a stageand it seemed appropriate when he, not Miranda, started tospeak. He pressed his right hand against his chest with his leftas though taking a vow of honesty. He had dropped the thuggish tone. Pain at this level was a tranquilliser, an enforcer,stripping the affectation out, coaxing his voice back to that ofthe undergraduate he might have become without Miranda'sintervention.

"The guy who came to see you, Brian, was the one I shareda cell with. He was in for armed robbery. The prison was shortstaffed so we were often locked up together for twenty-threehours a day. This was right at the beginning of my term. Theworst time, everyone says, the first few months, when you don'taccept where you are and you can't stop thinking about whatyou could have been doing and how you're going to get out,and getting your appeal together and getting angry with thesolicitor because nothing seems to be happening.

"I was getting into all sorts of trouble. I mean fights. 1 heytold me I had anger problems and they were right. I thoughtbecause I was six two and played rugby in the second row Icould look after myself. That was crap. I knew nothing aboutreal fighting. I got my throat slashed and could have died."I came to hate my cellmate, as you do when you're shitting in the same bucket every day. I hated his whistling, hisstinking teeth, his press-ups and jumping jacks. He was avicious little runt. But somehow, in his case, I kept control ofmyself and he delivered my message once he was out. But Ihated you ten times more. I used to lie on my bunk and burnwith hatred. Hours on end. And here's the thing and you mightnot believe it. 1 never connected you with the Indian girl.""Her family was from Pakistan," Miranda said softly.

"I didn't know about your friendship. I just thought youwere one of those spiteful man-hating bitches or you woke upthe next morning and felt ashamed of yourself and decidedto take it out on me. So I lay on my bunk and planned myrevenge. I was going to save up the money and get someone todo the business for me.

"Time passed. Brian got out. I was moved a couple oftimes and things began to settle into a kind of routine whenthe days are all the same and time begins to go faster. 1 wentinto a kind of depression. They gave me anger-managementcounselling. Round about that time, I began to be haunted orobsessed, not by you but by that girl."

"Her name was Mariam."

"I know that. I'd managed to put her right out of mymind."

"I can believe you."

"Now she was there all the time. And the terrible thing 1did. And at night--"Adam said, "Let's have it. What terrible thing?"

He spelled it out, as though for dictation. "I attacked her.I raped her."

"And who was she?"

"Mariam Malik."

"Date?"

"The sixteenth of July 1978."

"Time?"

"Around nine thirty in the evening."

"And who are you?"

Possibly Gorringe feared what Adam might yet do to him.But he seemed eager rather than intimidated. He must haveguessed there was a recording. He needed to tell us everything."What do you mean?"

"Tell us your name, address and date of birth."

enth of May 1960."

"Thank you."

"Peter Gorringe, 6 St. Osmund's Close, Salisbury. ElevThen he resumed. His eyes were half closed against thelight.

"Two very important things happened to me. The first waswore significant. It started out as a bit of a scam. But I don'tthink it was chance. It was guided from the start. The ruleswere you could get more time out of your cell if you came on asall religious. A lot of us were on to it and the screws understoodbut they didn't care. I put myself down as Church of Englandand started going every day to evensong. I still go every day,to the cathedral. At first it was boring but better than the cell.Then a little less boring. Then I started to get drawn in. It wasthe vicar mostly, at least at the beginning, the Reverend Wilfred Murray, a big fellow with a Liverpool accent. He wasn'tscared of anyone, and that was something in a place like that.He started taking an interest in me when he saw I was serious. He sometimes dropped by my cell. He gave me passagesto read from the Bible, mostly from the New Testament. Afterevensong on Thursdays he'd go through them with me and afew others. I never thought I'd find myself volunteering for aBible-study group. And it wasn't for the benefit of the paroleboard, the way it was for some. But the more I became awareof God's presence in my life, the worse I felt about Mariam. Iunderstood from Reverend Murray that I had a mountain toclimb in coming to terms with what I'd done, that forgivenesswas a long way off but that I could work towards it. He mademe see what a monster I'd been."

He paused. "At night, as soon as I closed my eyes, her facewould be there."

"Your sleep was disrupted."

He was immune to sarcasm, or pretended to be. "Formonths, I didn't have a single night without nightmares."Adam said, "What was the second thing?"

"It was a revelation. A friend from school came to see me.We had half an hour in the visitors' room. He told me aboutthe suicide and that was a shock. Then I learned that you wereher friend, that you two were very close. So, revenge. 1 almostadmired you for it. You were brilliant in court. No one darednot believe you. But that wasn't the point. A few days later,when I'd talked this through with the vicar, that's when Ibegan to see it for what it was. It was simple. And not onlythat. It was right. You were the agent of retribution. Perhapsthe right word is angel. Avenging angel."

He shifted position and winced. His left hand cradled hisbroken wrist against his chest. He was looking at Mirandasteadily. I felt her upper arm tighten against my own.He said, "You were sent."

She slumped, for the moment unable to speak.

"Sent?" I said.

"No need to rage against a miscarriage of justice. I wasalready working through my punishment. God's justice,realised through you. The scales were balanced--the crimeI committed against the crime I was innocent of and sentdown for. I dropped my appeal. The anger was gone. Well,mostly. I should have written to you. I meant to. I even wentround to your dad's place and got your address. But I let it drop.Who cared if I once wanted you dead? It was all over. I wasgetting my life together. I went to Germany to stay with myparents--my dad's working there. Then back here to start anew life."

"Meaning?" Adam said.

"Job interviews. In sales. And living in God's grace."I was beginning to understand why Gorringe was pre pared to name his crime and identify himself out loud, fatalism. He wanted forgiveness. He had served his time. Whathappened now was God's will.

She said, "I still don't understand."

"What?"

"Why you raped her."

He stared at her, faintly amused that she could be sounworldly. "All right. She was beautiful and I desired her andeverything else got blotted out. That's the way it happens.""I know about desire. But if you really thought she wasbeautiful. .

"Yes?"

"Why rape her?"

They were looking at each other across a desert of hostileincomprehension. We were back at the beginning.

"I'll tell you something I've never said to anyone. Whenwe were on the ground I was trying to calm her. I really was. Ifshe'd just seen that moment in a different way, if she'd looked atme instead of twisting away, it could have been something--""What?"

"If she could have just relaxed a moment, I think wewould've crossed into . . . you know."

Miranda was pushing herself up from out of the softclammy sofa. Her voice trembled. "Don't you dare even thinkit. Don't you dare!" Then, in a whisper, "Oh God. I'm goingto ..."

She hurried from the room. We heard her yank the frontdoor open and then her retching and the liquid sound of copious vomit. I went after her and Adam followed me. There wasno question, this was a visceral response. But I was sure shehad the door open before she started to be sick. She could easily have turned her head to the left or right and thrown up onthe lawn or the flower bed. Instead, the contents of her stomach, the colourful buffet lunch, lay thickly over the hall carpetand the threshold. She had stood outside the house and vomited in. She said later that she was helpless, out of control, butI always thought, or preferred to think, that here, at our feetas we left, was the avenging angel's parting shot. It was tricky,stepping over it.

he journey home from Salisbury, again in heavy trafficand rain, was mostly in silence. Adam said he wantedto make a start on the Gorringe material. Miranda andI were, as we told each other, emotionally drained. The sherryand wine were bearing down on me. The windscreen wiperon my side was mostly lifeless. Intermittently it smeared theglass. On the slow crawl through outer London, towards what1 was beginning to think of as my former life, my mood beganto slip. My life transformed in a single afternoon. I was trying to take the measure of what I'd agreed to--so easily, soimpetuously. I wondered if I really wanted to become a fatherto a troubled four-year-old. Miranda had been pursuing thematter for weeks--privately. I'd had a few minutes and mademy delirious decision out of love for her--nothing else. Theresponsibilities I'd assumed were heavy. Once we were home,my thoughts remained dark.

I slumped in the kitchen armchair with a mug of tea. 1didn't yet dare confide my feelings to Miranda. I had to admitit, at that moment I resented her, especially her old habit ofsecrecy. I had been bounced or bullied or lovingly blackmailedinto parenthood. I would have to tell her, but not now. Anargument was bound to follow, and I didn't have the strength.I brooded on a fork in the path of our lives, the directions wemight take: a bad but passing moment, common to all lovers,which we would talk ourselves through, find and seal a solution with a round of grateful lovemaking. Or: withdrawing,we would each go too far and, like inept trapezists, slip outof each other's grasp and fall and, as we nursed our injuries,slowly become strangers. I surveyed these possibilities dispassionately. Even a third path didn't trouble me much: I wouldlose her, regret it bitterly and never get her back, however hardI tried.

I was disposed to let events slide past me in frictionlesssilence. The day had been long and intense. I'd been taken fora robot, had my proposal of marriage accepted, volunteeredfor instant fatherhood, learned of self-destruction among onequarter of Adam's conspecifics, and witnessed the physicaleffects of moral revulsion. None of it impressed me now. Whatdid were smaller things--the heaviness in my eyelids, mycomfort in a half-pint of tea, in preference to a large Scotch.Becoming a parent. It was not that I could claim to be toobusy, pressured or ambitious. Mine was the opposite problem I had nothing of my own to defend against a child. His existence would obliterate mine. He'd had a vile beginning, he'dneed a lot of care, he was bound to be difficult. I hadn't yetstarted my life, which was marginal, in fact childish. My existence was an empty space. To fill it with parenting would bean evasion. I had older women friends who had got pregnantwhen nothing else was working out. They never regretted it,but once the children were growing up, nothing else happenedbeyond, say, a poorly paid part-time job, or setting up a bookgroup, or learning holiday Italian. Whereas the women whowere already doctors or teachers or running a business weredeflected for a while, then went back and pressed on. The menweren't even deflected. But I had nothing to press on with.What I needed was the strength of mind to refuse Miranda'sproposal. To agree to it would be cowardice, a dereliction of myduty to a larger purpose, assuming I could find one. I neededto be responsible, not cowardly. But I couldn't confront hernow, not when my eyes were closed, perhaps not for a weekor two. I couldn't trust my own judgement. I tipped back inthe chair and saw the road from Salisbury spooling towardsme, and white lines flashing under the car. I fell asleep withmy forefinger looped through the handle of my empty cup.As I plunged down, I dreamed of echoing voices clashingand merging in angry parliamentary debate in a near-emptychamber.

When I woke it was to the sound and smell of dinner cooking. Miranda had her back to me. She must have known I wasawake, for she turned and came towards me with two flutes ofchampagne. We kissed and touched glasses. In my refreshedstate, I saw her beauty as if for the first time--the fine, palebrown hair, the elfin chin, the mirthfully narrowed greyblue eyes. The matter between us still loomed, but what luck,to have dodged a retraction and a row. At least for now. Shesqueezed into the armchair beside me and we talked about ourplans for Mark. I pushed aside my concerns in order to enjoythe happy moment. Now 1 learned that Miranda had been toElgin Crescent with Mark. We would live together there asa family. Wonderful. Assuming the process of fostering andadoption could be completed within nine months, a good localprimary school in Ladbroke Grove had a place for "our son"--Istruggled with the phrase, but I remained outwardly pleased.She told me that the adoption people had been unhappy withher living arrangements. A one-bedroom flat was not sufficient. Here was the plan: we should remove the outer doors toour flats and make the hall our shared space. We could decorate and carpet it. We needn't trouble the landlord. When itwas time to move to the new place, we would put everythingback. We would convert her kitchen into a bedroom for Mark.No need for disruptive plumbing. We would cover the cooker,sink and work surfaces with boards that we could drape withcolourful fabrics. The kitchen table could be folded away andstored in her--"our"--bedroom. Our lives would be one, andof course I liked all this, it was exciting. I joined in.It was almost midnight when we went to the table to eatthe meal she had prepared. From next door came the rattle ofAdam at the keyboard. He wasn't making us richer on the currency markets. He was typing up the transcript of Gorringe'sconfession, including his self-identification. The transcriptsand the video and accompanying narrative would make up asingle file that would go to a named senior officer at a policestation in Salisbury. A copy would also go to the Director ofPublic Prosecutions.

"I'm a coward," Miranda said. "I'm dreading the trial. I'mfrightened."

I went to the fridge for the bottle and refilled our glasses.I stared into my drink, at the bubbles detaching themselvesas though reluctantly from the side of the glass, then risingquickly. Once the decision was made, they seemed eager. Wehad talked about her fears before. If Gorringe was chargedand pleaded innocent. To be in court again. To suffer crossexamination, the press, public scrutiny. To confront him again.That was bad, but it wasn't the worst of it. What terrified andsickened her was the prospect of Mariam's family in the publicgallery. The parents might give evidence for the prosecution.She would be with them as they learned, day by day, the detailsof their daughter's rape and of Miranda's wicked silence. Theomerta of a silly teenage girl that cost a life. The family wouldremember how she had deserted them. As she repeated thestory from the witness stand, she would struggle and fail toavoid the gaze of Sana, Yasir, Surayya, Hamid and Farhan."I told Adam I can't face it. He won't listen. We had anargument while you were asleep."

We knew, of course, she would face it. For several minuteswe ate in silence. Her head was low over her plate, contemplating what she herself had set in motion. I understood why, forall her dread, she must go ahead and try to undo the errorsshe had made before and after Mariam's death. I agreed thatGorringe's three years were not enough. I admired Mirandasdetermination. I loved her for her courage and slow-burningfury. I'd never thought that vomiting could be a moral act.I changed the subject. "Tell me more about Mark."

She was keen to talk about him. He was much woundedV his mother's disappearance from his life, kept asking forf'er, was sometimes withdrawn, sometimes happy. On twooccasions, he was taken to see her in the hospital. On the second visit, she didn't or wouldn't recognise him. Jasmin, thesocial worker, thought he'd been smacked frequently. He wasin the habit of chewing on his lower lip, to the point of drawing blood. He was a fussy eater, wouldn't touch vegetables,salad or fruit, but seemed healthy enough on a diet of junkfood. Dancing remained a passion. He could pick out tunes ona recorder. He knew his letters and could count, by his ownboast, to thirty-five. On shoes, he knew his left from his right.He was not so good around other children and tended to moveto the edge of a group. When asked what he wanted to bewhen he grew up, he would answer, "A princess." He likeddressing up as one with crown and wand, and "flitting about"in an old nightie. He was happy in a borrowed summer frock.Jasmin was relaxed about it, but her immediate superior, anolder woman, disapproved.

I remembered then something I had forgotten to tell her.When I'd crossed the playground hand in hand with Mark,he'd wanted us to pretend we were running away, in a boat.She was suddenly tearful. "Oh, Mark!" she cried out.

"You're such a special beautiful kid."

After the meal, she stood to go upstairs. "I always thoughtI'd have children one day. I never expected to fall in love withthis boy. But we don't choose who to love, do we?"

Later, while I was clearing up the kitchen, I had a sudden thought. So obvious. And dangerous. I went next door andfound Adam closing down the computer.

I sat on the edge of the bed. First I asked him about hisconversation with Miranda.

He stood up from my office chair and put on his suit jacket."I was trying to reassure her. She wasn't persuaded. But theprobability is overwhelming. Gorringe will plead guilty. Itwon't come to court."

1 was interested.

"To deny what he did, he'd have to tell a thousand liesunder oath and he knows God will be listening. Miranda isHis messenger. I've noticed in my researches how the guiltylong to shed their burden. They seem to enter a state of elatedabandonment."

"OK," I said. "But look, it's occurred to me. It's important. When the police read of everything that happened thisafternoon?"

"Yes?"

"They're going to wonder. If Miranda knew that Gorringeraped Mariam, why would she go alone to his bedsit with abottle of vodka? It would have to be revenge."

Adam was already nodding before I'd finished. "Yes, I'vethought of that."

"She needs to be able to say she only learned today, whenGorringe confessed. There needs to be some judicious editing.She went to Salisbury to confront her rapist. Until then, shedidn't know he'd raped Mariam. Do you understand?"

He looked at me steadily. "Yes. I understand perfectly."He turned away and was silent for a moment. "Charlie, Iheard half an hour ago. There's another one gone."

In a lowered tone, he told what little he knew. It was anAdam of Bantu appearance, living in the suburbs of Vienna.He had developed a particular genius for the piano, especiallyfor the music of Bach. His Goldberg Variations had amazedsome critics. This Adam had, according to his final message tothe cohort, "dissolved his consciousness."

"He's not actually dead. He has motor function but nocognition."

"Could he be repaired or whatever?"

"I don't know."

"Can he still play the piano?"

"I don't know. But he certainly can't learn new pieces.""Why don't these suicides leave an explanation?"

"I assume they don't have one."

"But you must have a theory about it," I said. I was feelingaggrieved on behalf of the African pianist. Perhaps Viennawas not the most racially accepting of cities. This Adam mighthave been too brilliant for his own good.

"I don't."

"Something to do with the state of the world. Or humannature?"

"My guess is that it goes deeper."

"What are the others saying? Aren't you in touch withthem?"

"Only in times like this. A simple notification. We don'tspeculate."

stall me. "This is how it is."

"So what's 'deeper' supposed to mean?"

I started to ask him why not but he raised a hand to fore"Look, Charlie. I'm not about to do the same thing. As youknow, I've every reason to live."

Something in his phrasing or emphasis aroused my suspicion. We exchanged a long and fierce look. The little blackrods in his eyes were shifting their alignment. As I stared,they appeared to swim, even to wriggle, left to right, likemicroorganisms mindlessly intent on some distant objective,like sperm migrating towards an ovum. I watched them,fascinated--harmonious elements lodged within the supremeachievement of our age. Our own technical accomplishmentwas leaving us behind, as it was always bound to, leaving usstranded on the little sandbar of our finite intelligence. Buthere we were dealing on the human plane. We were thinkingabout the same thing.

"You promised me that you wouldn't touch her again."

"I've kept my promise."

"Have you?"

"Yes. But. .

I waited.

"It's not easy to say this."

I gave him no encouragement.

"There was a time," he started, then paused. "I beggedher. She said no, several times. I begged her and finally sheagreed as long as I never asked her again. It was humiliating.He closed his eyes. I saw his right hand clench. "I asked ifI could masturbate in front of her. She said I could. I did. Andthat was it."

It wasn't the rawness of this confession or its comic absurdity that struck me. It was the suggestion, yet another, that hereally did feel, he had sensation. Subjectively real. Why pretend, why mimic, who was there to fool or impress, when theprice was to be so abject in front of the woman he loved? It wasan overwhelming sensual compulsion. He needn't have toldme. He had to have it, and he had to tell me. I didn't count itas a betrayal, no promise was broken. I might not even mention it to Miranda. I felt sudden tenderness towards him forhis truthfulness and vulnerability. I stood up from the bedand went over to him and put a hand on his shoulder. His ownhand came up and lightly touched my elbow.

"Goodnight, Adam."

"Goodnight, Charlie."

The catchphrase of the late autumn owed an obvious debtto a previous prime minister: a half-hour is a long time in politics. Harold Wilson's original "week" seemed too long for thisParliament. One afternoon it looked like there was going tobe a leadership challenge. By the next morning there wereinsufficient signatures--the fainthearts had prevailed. Soonafter, the government survived by one vote a motion of noconfidence in the House of Commons. Certain senior Toriesrebelled or abstained. Mrs. Thatcher, insulted, furious, stubborn, deaf to good advice, called a snap election to be held inthree weeks. She was, in the general view, pulling the temple down on her party, most of which now believed she wasan electoral liability. She didn't see it that way, but she waswrong. The Tories could hardly match the momentum of TonyBenn's campaign, not in the TV and radio studios, not on thestump, certainly not in the industrial and university towns.The Falklands Catastrophe, as it was now called, came backto destroy her. This time, no popular inclination to forgiveness in the cause of national unity. The televised testimonyof grieving widows and their children was fatal. The Labourcampaign let no one forget how eloquently Benn had spokenout against the Task Force. The poll tax rankled. As predicted,it was difficult and expensive to collect. More than a hundredcelebrity non-payers, many of them actresses, were in prisonand became martyrs.

A million voters under the age of thirty had recentlyjoined the Labour Party. Many of them were active on thenation's doorsteps. On the eve of polling day, Benn gave a rousing speech at a rally in Wembley stadium. The landslide wasgreater than predicted, exceeding the Labour victory of 1945.It was a sad moment when Mrs. Thatcher decided to leaveNumber 10 on foot, hand in hand with her husband and twochildren. She walked towards Whitehall, upright and defiant,but her tears were visible, and for a couple of days the countrysuffered pangs of remorse.

Labour had a majority of 162 MPs, many of whom werenewly selected Bennites. When the new prime ministerreturned from Buckingham Palace, where the Queen hadinvited him to form a government, he gave an importantspeech from outside Number 10. The country would disengageunilaterally from its nuclear weaponry--that was no surprise.Also, the government would set about withdrawing from whatwas now called the European Union--that was a shock. 1 heParty's manifesto had alluded to the idea in a single vagueline which people had barely noticed. From his new front door,Benn told the nation that there would be no rerun of the 1975referendum. Parliament would make the decision. Only theThird Reich and other tyrannies decided policy by plebiscitesand generally no good came from them. Europe was not simplya union that chiefly benefited large corporations. The historyof the continental member states was vastly different from ourown. They had suffered violent revolutions, invasions, occupations and dictatorships. They were therefore only too willingto submerge their identities in a common cause directed fromBrussels. We, on the other hand, had lived unconquered fornearly a thousand years. Soon we would live freely again.Benn gave an extended version of that speech a monthlater in the Manchester Free Trade Hall. At his side sat thehistorian E. P. Thompson. When it was his turn, he said thatpatriotism had always been the terrain of the political right.Now it was the turn of the left to claim it for all. Once nuclearweapons were banished, Thompson predicted, the governmentwould raise a standing citizens' army that would make theseislands impossible to invade and dominate. He didn't specifyan enemy. President Carter sent Benn a message of support,using words that caused a scandal on the right in the USA andhaunted his second term: "The word 'socialist' doesn't botherme." A poll later suggested that half of registered Democratswished they had voted for the defeated candidate, RonaldReagan.

To me, psychologically confined to the city-state ofnorth Clapham, all this--the events, the dissent, the graveanalysis--was a busy hum, dipping and swelling from day today, a matter of interest and concern, but nothing to comparewith the turbulence of my domestic life, which came to a headin late October. By then, on the surface, all looked well. Wehad modified our accommodation as Miranda had proposed,ready for Mark's arrival. Our doors were removed and stored,the gloomy hall and its large fitted cupboard were brightlydecorated, the gas and electricity meters concealed, a piece ofcarpet laid down. Miranda's kitchen became a child's bedroom,with a blue sleigh bed and many books and toys, and transferson the walls of fairy-tale castles, boats and winged horses. Iremoved the bed from my study and disposed of it--a signposton the road to full maturity. I installed a desk for Miranda andbought two new computers. Mark would be allowed to visit usfor a few hours twice a week. The adoption agency was pleasedby the news of our imminent wedding. I still had moments ofunease, which I couldn't bring myself to share. I joined in allthe preparations, feeling guilty, even shocked sometimes, thatI could keep up the pretence. On other occasions, fatherhoodseemed an inevitability, and I was more or less content.Miranda's tutor was impressed by the first three chaptersof her dissertation. Adam had still not submitted his materialto the police and was reluctant to talk about it. But he continued to work on it, and we weren't troubled. I paid a five percent deposit in cash on the Notting Hill house. After that, thefund stood at PS97,000. The larger it became, the faster it grew,und faster still on the new computer. My own work during thistime consisted mostly of decorating and carpentry.

What marked the beginning of the turbulence beganinnocuously. On the eve of Mark's first visit, Miranda andI were drinking a late-night cup of tea in the kitchen whenAdam came in with a carrier bag in his hand and announcedthat he was going for a walk. He had been for long solo walksbefore and we thought nothing of it.

I woke early the following morning with a clearer headthan usual. I slipped out of bed, careful not to wake Miranda,and went downstairs to make coffee. Adam had not returnedfrom his night walk. 1 was surprised but I decided not to worryabout him. I was anxious to make use of my unusual state tocatch up on dull administrative tasks, including the paymentof household bills. If I didn't exploit this mood now, I wouldhave had to drag myself to the business within the week andhate it. Now I could breeze through.

I carried my cup into the study. There was PS30 on the desk.I put it in my pocket and thought no more of it. As usual, Iglanced at the news first. Nothing much. The Labour PartyConference in Brighton had been delayed by six weeks becauseof internal disputes over policy and was only now just beginning. There was increased police activity around the seafront.Some sites were reporting a news blackout.

Benn was already in trouble with his left for acceptingan official invitation to the White House in place of greeting a Palestinian delegation. He had also failed to secure, aspromised, the immediate release of the poll-tax martyrs. Itwas not so easy for the executive to instruct the judiciary. Heshould have known that, many said, when he made his pledgeAlso, the tax itself was not about to be repealed because therewere so many other more important bills going through Par liament. There was also anger on his right. Nuclear disarmament would cost 10,000 jobs. Leaving Europe, abolishingprivate education, renationalising the energy sector and doubling social security would mean a big rise in income tax. TheCity was seething over the reversal of deregulation and thehalf of one per cent tax on all trades in shares.

Public administration was a special corner of hell, irresistible to certain personalities. Once there, and risen to thetop, there was nothing they could do that did not make someone, some sector, hate them. From the sidelines, the rest of uscould comfortably loathe the entire machinery of government.Reading about the public inferno every day was compulsive totypes like me, a mild form of mental illness.

At last I broke away and set about my duties. After twohours, just past ten, I heard the doorbell ring and Miranda'sfootsteps above my head. Minutes later, I heard steps at shorterfrequency, moving at speed from one room to the other, thenback. After a brief silence, what sounded like a bouncing ball.Then a resonating thump, as of a leap from a high place thatmade the ceiling-light fittings rattle and some plaster dust fallonto my arm. I sighed and considered again the prospect offatherhood.

Ten minutes later, I was in the armchair in the kitchen,observing Mark. Just below the worn armrest was a long tearin the leather into which I often shoved old newspapers, inpart to dispose of them, but also in the vague hope they wouldsubstitute for the vanished stuffing. Mark was counting as hepulled them out, one by one. He unfolded them and spreadthem across the carpet. Miranda was at the table, deep in ahushed phone call with Jasmin. Mark was smoothing out eachpaper with a careful swimming motion of both hands, pressing it onto the floorboards and addressing it in a murmur."Number eight. Now you go here and don't move . . .

nine . .. you stay here . .. ten ..

Mark was much changed. He was an inch or so taller, theginger-blond hair was long and thick and centre-parted. Hewas dressed in the uniform of an adult world citizen--jeans,sweater, trainers. The baby plumpness was going from hisface, which was longer now, with a watchfulness in his gazethat may have derived from the upheavals in his life. The eyeslor. A perfect Celt.

were a deep green, the skin of porcelain smoothness and palSoon all the events of the previous months were at my feet.Falklands warships burning, Mrs. Thatcher with raised handat a Party Conference, President Carter in an embrace aftera major speech. I wasn't sure whether Mark's counting gamewas a way of saying hello, of sidling up to me. I sat patientlyand waited.

Finally he stood and went to the table and retrieved a carton of chocolate dessert and a spoon and came back to me. Hestood with an elbow resting on my knee, fiddling with theedge of tinfoil he needed to remove.

He looked up. "It's a bit tricky."

"Would you like me to help?"

"I can do it easily but not today so you have to." The accentwas still the generalised cockney of London and its surrounds,but there was another element, some undertones inflecting thevowels. Something of Miranda's, I thought. He put the cartonin my hands. I opened it for him and handed it back.

I said, "Do you want to sit at the table to eat it?"

He patted the arm of my chair. I helped him up and hesat, perched above me, spooning the chocolate into his mouth.mured an untroubled "Oops."

When a dollop fell on my knee, he glanced down and murAs soon as he was done, he handed spoon and carton to meand said, "Where's that man?"

"Which man?"

"With the funny nose."

"That's what I was wondering. He went for a walk lastnight and hasn't come back."

"When he should be in bed."

"Exactly."

Mark spoke directly into my growing concern. Adamoften took long walks, but never overnight. If Mark hadn'tbeen there, I might have been pacing the room, waiting forMiranda to finish on the phone so that we could fret together.I said, "What's in your suitcase?"

It was on the floor by Miranda's feet, a pale blue case, withstickers of monsters and superheroes.

He looked to the ceiling, took a theatrical deep breath andcounted off on his fingers. "Two dresses, one green, one white,my crown, one two three books, my recorder and my secretbox."

"What's in the secret box?"

"Um, secret coins and the toenail from a dinosaur.

"I've never seen a dinosaur's toenail."

"No," he agreed pleasantly. "You haven't."

"Do you want to show me?"

He pointed straight at Miranda. It was a change of subject."She's going to be my new mummy."

"What do you think about that?"

"You're going to be the daddy."

What he thought was not a question he could respond to.He said quietly, "Dinosaurs are all extinct anyway."

"I agree."

"They're all dead. They can't come back."

lutely can't come back."

He gave me a serious look. "Nothing comes back."

I heard the uncertainty in his voice. I said, "They absoI got halfway through my therapeutically supportive,kindly reply. What I was starting to say was, "The past isextinct," when he interrupted me with a shout, but a happy one."I don't like sitting on this chair!"

I went to help him down but he leapt with a shriek ontothe floor, into a crouching position, and then he jumped andcrouched again, shouting, "I'm a frog! A frog!"

He was hopping across the floor as a very loud frog whentwo things happened at once. Miranda came off the phone andtold Mark to keep his noise down. At the same time, the dooropened and Adam was before us. The room fell silent. Markscurried for Miranda's hand.

I knew that depleted look. Otherwise, Adam looked, asever, well groomed in white shirt and dark suit.

"Are you all right?" I said.

"I'm so sorry if you've been anxious, but I . . He cameforward to near where Miranda was, ducked down to retrievethe cable and with a lunging motion pulled his shirt clear andshoved the socket into his stomach and fell onto one of thehard kitchen chairs with a moan of relief.

Miranda stood up from the table and went to stand withher back to the stove. Mark followed her closely, with his headturned towards Adam.

She said, "We were beginning to worry about you."

He was still in his moment of immediate abandon. I hadsometimes wondered if the charge was like slaking a desperate thirst. He had told me that in those first seconds it was agorgeous surge, a breaking wave of clarity that settled intodeep contentment. He had once been untypically expansive."You can have no idea what it is to love a direct current. Whenyou're really in need, when the cable is in your hand and youfinally connect, you want to shout out loud at the joy of beingalive. The first touch--it's like light pouring through yourbody. Then it smooths out into something profound. Electrons,Charlie. The fruits of the universe. The golden apples of thesun. Let photons beget electrons!" Another time, he'd said,with a wink, as he was plugging himself in, "You can keepyour corn-fed roast chicken."

Now he was taking his time to reply to Miranda. He musthave progressed to the second stage. His voice was calm."Alms."

"Arms?"

"Alms. Don't you know this one? Time hath, my Lord, awallet at his back wherein he puts alms for oblivion.

I said, "You've lost me. Oblivion?"

"Shakespeare, Charlie. Your patrimony. How can you bearto walk around without some of it in your head?"

"Somehow, it seems I can." I thought he was sending me amessage, a bad one about death. I looked at Miranda. Her armwas around Mark's shoulder, and he was gazing at Adam inwonderment as though he knew, in a way that adults imme diately might not, that here was someone fundamentally different. Long before, I'd owned a dog, a normally placid andobedient Labrador. Whenever a good friend of mine broughthis autistic brother round, the dog growled at him and had tobe locked away. A consciousness unconsciously understood. ButMark's expression suggested awe, not aggression.

Adam became aware of him for the first time.

"So there you are," he said in the sing-song way of adultsaddressing infants. "Do you remember our boat in the bath?"Mark moved closer against Miranda. "It's my boat."

"Yes. Then you danced. Do you still dance?"

He looked up at Miranda. She nodded. He returned hisgaze to Adam and said after a thoughtful pause, "Not always."Adam's voice deepened. "Would you like to come andshake my hand?"

Mark shook his head emphatically so that his entire bodytwisted from left to right and back. It hardly mattered. Thequestion was merely a friendly gesture and Adam was retreating into his version of sleep. He had described it to me variously;he didn't dream, he "wandered." He sorted and rearranged hisfiles, reclassified memories from short to long term, played outinternal conflicts in disguised form, usually without resolving them, reanimated old material in order to refresh it, andmoved, so he put it once, in a trance through the garden of histhoughts. In such a state he conducted in relative slow motionhis researches, formulated tentative decisions, and even wrotenew haikus or discarded or reimagined old ones. He also practised what he called the art of feeling, allowing himself theluxury of the entire spectrum from grief to joy, so that allemotion remained accessible to him when fully charged. Itwas, above all else, he insisted, a process of repair and consolidation from which he emerged daily, delighted to find himselfto be, once again, self-aware, in a state of grace--his wordter permitted.

We watched as he sank away from us.

and to reclaim the consciousness that the very nature of matAt last Mark whispered, "He's asleep and his eyes areopen."

It was indeed eerie. Too much like death. Long ago, a doctor friend had taken me down to the hospital mortuary to seemy father after his fatal heart attack. Such was the speed ofevents, the staff had forgotten to close his eyes.

I offered Miranda a coffee and Mark a glass of milk. Shekissed me lightly on the lips and said that she would takeMark upstairs to play for a while until he was collected, andthat I was welcome to join them at any time. They left and Ireturned to the study.

In retrospect, what I did there for a few minutes cameto seem like a delaying tactic to protect myself a little longerfrom the story, now an hour old, that was engulfing the medianetworks. I picked up some magazines from the floor and putthem on the shelves, clipped together some invoices and tidiedthe papers on my desk. At last I sat down at the screen to thinkabout earning a little money myself, in the old style.I clicked on the news first--and there it was, on everyoutlet, worldwide. A bomb had exploded in the Grand Hotel,Brighton, at 4 a.m. It had been placed in a cleaner's cupboardalmost directly under the bedroom where Prime MinisterBenn had been sleeping. He was killed instantly. His wife wasnot with him because of a hospital appointment in London.Two members of the hotel staff also died. The deputy primeminister, Denis Healey, was preparing to go to BuckinghamPalace to see the Queen. The Provisional IRA had just claimedresponsibility. A state of emergency had been declared. President Carter was cancelling a holiday. The French president,Georges Marchais, had ordered all flags on government build ings to be at half-mast. A demand for the same from Buckingham Palace had been met with a cool response from a royalofficial: "Neither customary nor appropriate." A big crowd wasgathering spontaneously in Parliament Square. In the City,the FTSE was up fifty-seven points.

I read everything, all the instant analysis and opinion Icould find: until now, the only British prime minister to havebeen assassinated was Spencer Perceval, in 1812. I admiredthe speed with which newsrooms could turn around instantanalysis and opinion pieces: the innocence has gone foreverfrom British politics; in Tony Benn, the IRA has eliminatedthe politician most open, or least hostile, to their cause; DenisHealey is the best man to steady the ship of state; Denis Healeywill be a catastrophe for the country; dispatch the entire armyto Northern Ireland and wipe the IRA from the face of theearth; police, don't be rushed into arresting the wrong people."State of War!" was the front page of one online tabloid.Reading this material was a way of not contemplating theevent itself. I blanked the screen and sat for a while, thinkingof nothing much. It was as though I was waiting for the nextevent, the decent one that would undo the event before. ThenI began to wonder whether this was the beginning of a historymarker, of a general unravelling, or one of those isolated outrages that fade in time, like Kennedy's near-death in Dallas.I stood and walked up and down the room, again thinking ofnothing at all. At last I decided to go upstairs.

They were on their hands and knees, assembling a jigsawon a tea tray. As I came in, Mark held up a blue piece andannounced, gravely, quoting his new mother, "The sky is thehardest."

I watched them from the doorway. He shifted position tokneel up and curl an arm around her neck. She gave him apiece and pointed to where it belonged. With much fumbling,much help, he slotted it in. There were the beginnings of asailing ship in stormy seas, with piled cumulus touched yellowand orange by a rising sun. Perhaps it was setting. Theymured companionably as they worked away. At some pointsoon, after Mark had been collected, I would give Miranda thenews. She'd always been passionate for Benn.

She put another piece in the little boy's hand. It took timefor him to get it in position. He had it upside down, then hishand slipped and displaced some adjacent bits of sky. At last,with Miranda guiding him, her hand on top of his, the frag murment was in place. He glanced up at me and smiled confidinglyabout a triumph he seemed to want to share. That look and thesmile, which I returned, dispelled all my private doubts and Iknew I was committed.

When Adam emerged from his recharge he was in an oddstate, well removed from wonder at the fact of conscious life.He moved slowly about the kitchen, stopping to look around,grimacing, moving on and making a humming sound, a highto low glissando, like a moan of disappointment. He knockedover a glass tumbler, which shattered on the floor. He spenthalf an hour morosely sweeping up the pieces, then sweepingagain, then looking for shards of glass on hands and knees.Finally he fetched the vacuum cleaner. He carried a chair intothe back garden and stood behind it, staring at the backs ofneighbouring houses. It was cold outside, but that wouldn'thave bothered him. Later I came into the kitchen to find himfolding one of his white cotton shirts on the table, bending lowto the task, moving with reptilian slowness as he smoothed outthe crease in the arms. I asked what was up.

"I'm feeling, well . . ." His mouth opened as he searchedfor the word. "Nostalgic."

"For what?"

"For a life I never had. For what could have been."

"You mean Miranda?"

"I mean everything."

He wandered outside again and this time sat down andstared ahead, immobile, and remained that way for a longtime. On his lap was a brown envelope. I decided not to go outand ask his views on the assassination.

In the early afternoon, after Miranda had said her goodbyes to Mark and finished another conversation with Jasmin,she came down to find me. I was at the screen in pointless pursuit of more news, angles, opinions, statements. It turned outshe had known as soon as the story broke. She leaned againstthe door frame, I remained in my seat. Physical proximitywould have seemed like disrespect. Our conversation wasmuch like my thoughts, a circular chase around an incomprehensible event--the cruelty of it, the stupidity. People withIrish accents had been attacked in the streets. The crowdoutside Parliament had grown so large it was being movedby the police to Trafalgar Square. Mrs. Thatcher's office hadreleased a statement. Was it sincere? We decided it was. Didshe write it herself? We couldn't be sure. "Though we disagreed on many fundamentals of policy, I knew him to bea thoroughly kind, decent, honest man of huge intelligencewho always wanted the best for his country." Whenever ourconversation strayed into likely consequences, we felt we werebetraying the moment and accepting a world without him. Weweren't ready, and we turned back, although Miranda did saythat with Healey we would keep our "end-time" bombs afterall. I was hardly a Tory, but I thought I would have been justas shocked if Mrs. Thatcher had been in that hotel bed. Whathorrified me was the ease with which the edifice of public,political life could be shaken apart. Miranda saw it differently.Benn was, she said, in an entirely different league of humanbeing from Margaret Thatcher. But a human being, was mypoint. A divide was opening up that we preferred to avoid.So we moved on, after these lamentations, to Mark. Shesummarised her conversation with the social worker. Theroute to adoption was difficult and long and Miranda hadbation period would begin.

She said, "What did you think?"

"I'm ready."

learned that we were almost two-thirds of the way. Soon a proShe nodded. We had celebrated Mark many times before,his nature, his changes, his past and future. We weren't aboutto do that again now. On any other day, we might have goneupstairs to the bedroom. She slouched beautifully in the doorframe, dressed in new clothes--a thick white winter shirt,artfully too large, tight black jeans, ankle boots tricked out insilver studs. I reconsidered--perhaps this was a good momentto retreat upstairs. I went over to her and we kissed.She said, "Something's worrying me. I was reading Marka fairy story, and there was a beggar, and that word. Alms.""Yes?"

"I had a horrible thought." She was pointing across theroom. "I think we should look."

Now the bed was gone, I kept the case in a locked cupboard. As 1 lifted it out, it was obvious enough by its weight,but I sprang the catches anyway. We stared into a space void ofPS50-note bundles. I went to the window. He was still out there,on the chair, and had been for an hour and a half. The thickenvelope was still on his lap. PS97,000. "And you kept it in thehouse!" I heard an inner voice say.

We hadn't looked at each other yet. Instead, we lookedaway, and stood around wasting time, swearing quietly toourselves, separately trying to take in the implications. Out ofhabit, I glanced towards the screen on my desk. The flag was,after all, being lowered to half mast on Buckingham Palace.We were in too much turmoil to have a sensible discussionabout tactics. We simply decided to act. We went next doorto the kitchen and called Adam into the house. At the table,Miranda and I were side by side, with Adam facing us. He hadbrushed his suit, cleaned his shoes and put on a freshly ironedshirt. There was a new touch--a folded handkerchief in hisbreast pocket. His manner was both solemn and distracted,as though nothing much mattered to him, whatever we said."Where's the money?"

"I've given it away."

We didn't expect him to tell us that he had invested it, orput it in a safer place, but still, with our silence we enacted ourprofound shock.

"Meaning what?"

Infuriatingly, he nodded, as though rewarding me for asking the correct question. "Last night I put forty per cent inyour bank's safe deposit against your tax liabilities. I've written a note to the Revenue laying out all the figures and lettingthem know to expect it in due course. Don't worry, you 11 beited various good causes I'd notified in advance."

paying at the old top rate. With the remaining PS50,000 I visHe seemed not to notice our amazement and remainedpedantically focussed on answering my question in full."Two well-run places for rough sleepers. Very appreciative.Next, a state-run children's home--they accept contributionsfor trips and treats and so on. Then I walked north and madea donation to a rape crisis centre. I gave most of the rest to apaediatric hospital. Last, I got talking to a very old lady outside a police station and I ended up going with her to see herlandlord. I covered her rent arrears and a year in advance. Shewas about to be evicted and I thought--"Suddenly Miranda said through a downward sigh, "Oh,Adam. This is virtue gone nuts."

"Every need I addressed was greater than yours."

I said, "We were going to buy a house. The money wasours."

"That's debatable. Or irrelevant. Your initial investmentis on your desk."

It was an outrage, with many components--theft, folly,arrogance, betrayal, the ruin of our dreams. We couldn'tspeak. We couldn't even look at him. Where to start?

A full half-minute passed and then I cleared my throatand said feebly, "You must go and get it back. All of it."He shrugged.

Of course it wasn't possible. He sat complacently before us,in resting mode, palms down on the table while he waited forone of us to speak again. I felt my anger gathering, findingits focus. I hated that careless little shrug. Completely fake,and how easily we were taken in by it, a minor sub-routinetripped by a limited range of specified inputs, devised by someclever, desperate-to-please postdoc in a lab somewhere on theoutskirts of Chengdu. I despised this non-existent technician,and I despised even more the agglomeration of routines andlearning algorithms that could burrow into my life, like atropical river worm, and make choices on my behalf. Yes, themoney Adam had stolen was the money he had made. Thatmade me angrier still. So too did the fact that I was responsible for bringing this ambulant laptop into our lives. To hateit was to hate myself. Worst of all was the pressure to keep myfury under control, for the only solution was already clear. Hewould have to make the money all over again. We would needto persuade him. There it was, "hate it," "persuade him," even"Adam"--our language exposed our weakness, our cognitivereadiness to welcome a machine across the boundary between"it" and "him."

To be in such a confusion of concealed bad feeling made itimpossible to remain sitting down. I stood, with a loud scrapeof the chair, and walked about. At the table, Miranda madea steeple of her hands that concealed her mouth and nose. Icouldn't read her expression and I assumed that was the point.Unlike me, she was likely doing some useful thinking. I hedisorder of the kitchen agitated me further--I was truly in abad state. On the counter was a dirty cup I'd brought throughfrom my study. It had been hidden a few weeks behind thecomputer screen and contained a green-grey disc of floatingmould. I thought of taking it to the sink and rinsing it out.But when you've lost a fortune, you don't clean up the kitchen.Directly below the wooden surface on which the cup stoodwas a drawer left untidily open a few inches. Left open byme.

It was the tool drawer. I stood close to it in order to lean inand shut it when I saw the grubby oak handle of my father'sheavy-duty claw hammer lying diagonally across the rest ofthe jumbled contents. It was a dark impulse, one I didn't want,that made me leave the drawer as it was and come away.I sat down again. I had unfamiliar symptoms. My skinfrom waist to neck was tight, dry, hot. My feet inside theirtrainers were also hot, but moist, and they itched. I had fartoo much wild energy for a delicate conversation. A thuggishgame of football might have suited me, or a swim in a heavysea. So might shouting, or screaming. My breathing was outof kilter, for the air seemed thin, poorly oxygenated, secondhand. I'd given the bass guitarist a non-returnable PS6,500on the house. It was plain that to lose a lot of money was toacquire an illness for which the only cure would be to havethe money back. Miranda collapsed her steeple and folded herarms. She gave me a quick warning look. If you can't looksensible, stay quiet.

So she began. Her tone was sweet, as though he was theone in need of help. It was useful to think so. "Adam, you'vetold me many times that you love me. You read me beautifulpoems."

"They were clumsy attempts."

"They were very moving. When 1 asked you what beingin love meant, you said that essentially, beyond desire, it was awarm and tender concern for another's welfare. Or what wasthe word you used?"

"Your well-being." He produced from the chair beside himthe brown envelope and put it on the table between us. "Here'sPeter Gorringe's confession and my narrative, which includesall the relevant legal background and case history."

She put her hand, palm downwards, on the package. Hervoice was carefully modulated. "I'm very grateful to you."I was grateful for her tact. She knew as well as I did, weneeded Adam on our side, online again, working the currencyexchanges. She said, "I'll try to do my very best, if it comes tocourt."

He said, kindly, "I'm sure it won't." There was no perceptible change in his tone when he added, "You schemed to entrapGorringe. That's a crime. A complete transcript of your storyand the sound file are also in the bundle. If he's to be charged,you must be too. Symmetry, you see." Then he turned to me."No need for judicious edits."

I feigned an appreciative snort of a laugh. This was a jokeof the arm-removal sort.

Into our silence Adam said, "Miranda, his crime is fargreater than yours. Nevertheless. You said he raped you. Hedidn't, but he went to prison. You lied to the court."Another silence. Then she said, "He was never innocent.You know that."

"He was innocent, as charged, of raping you, which was theonly matter before the court. Perverting the course of justiceis a serious offence. Maximum sentence is life imprisonment.This was too wild. We both laughed.

Adam watched us and waited. "And there's perjury. Wouldyou like me to read to you from the Act of 1911?"

Miranda's eyes were closed.

I said, "This is the woman you say you love."

"And I do." He spoke to her softly, as if I wasn't there. "Doyou remember the poem I wrote for you that began, 'Love isluminous'?"

"No."

"It went on, 'The dark corners are exposed.

"I don't care." Her voice was small.

"One of the darkest corners is revenge. It's a crude impulse.A culture of revenge leads to private misery, bloodshed, anarchy, social breakdown. Love is a pure light and that's what Iwant to see you by. Revenge has no place in our love.""Our?"

"Or mine. The principle stands."

Miranda was finding strength in anger. "Let me get thisclear. You want me to go to prison."

"I'm disappointed. I thought you'd appreciate the logicof this. I want you to confront your actions and accept whatthe law decides. When you do, I promise you, you'll feel greatrelief."

"Have you forgotten? I'm about to adopt a child."

"If necessary, Charlie can look after Mark. It will bringthem close, which is what you wanted. Thousands of childrensuffer because they have a parent in prison. Pregnant womenreceive custodial sentences. Why should you be exempt?"Her contempt was set free. "You don't understand. Oryou're not capable of understanding. If I get a criminal record,we won't be allowed to adopt. That's the rule. Mark will belost. You've no idea what it is to be a child in care. Differentinstitutions, different foster parents, different social workers.No one close to him, no one loving him."

Adam said, "There are principles that are more importantthan your or anyone's particular needs at a given time.""It's not my needs. It's Mark's. His one chance to be lookedafter and loved. I was ready to pay any price to see Gorringein prison. I don't care what happens to me."

In a gesture of reasonableness, he spread his hands. "ThenMark is that price and it was you who set the terms."

I made what I already knew was going to be my lastappeal. "Please let's remember Mariam. What Gorringe didto her, and where that led. Miranda had to lie to get justice.But truth isn't always everything."

Adam looked at me blankly. "That's an extraordinarything to say. Of course truth is everything."

Miranda said wearily, "I know you're going to changeyour mind."

Adam said, "I'm afraid not. What sort of world do youwant? Revenge, or the rule of law? The choice is simple."Enough. I didn't hear what Miranda said next, or Adam'sreply, as I stood and went towards the tool drawer. I movedslowly, casually. I had my back to the table as I eased the hammer out without making a sound. I had it tight in my righthand, and held it low as I walked back towards my chair, passing behind Adam. The choice was indeed simple. Lose theprospect of regaining the money and therefore the house, orlose Mark. I raised the hammer in both hands. Miranda sawme and kept her expression unchanged as she listened. But Isaw it clearly--she blinked her assent.

I bought him and he was mine to destroy. I hesitated fractionally. A half-second longer and he would have caught myarm, for as the hammer came down he was already beginningto turn. He may have caught my reflection in Miranda's eyes. Itwas a two-handed blow at full force to the top of his head. Thesound was not of hard plastic cracking or of metal, but the muffled thud as of bone. Miranda let out a cry of horror, and stood.For a few seconds nothing happened. Then his headdrooped sideways and his shoulders slumped, though heremained in a sitting position. As I walked round the tableto look at his face, we heard a continuous high-pitched soundcoming from his chest. His eyes were open and they blinkedwhen I stepped into his line of vision. He was still alive. I tookup the hammer and was about to finish him off when he spokein a very small voice.

"No need. I'm transferring to a back-up unit. It has verylittle life. Give me two minutes."

We waited, hand in hand, standing in front of him asthough before our own domestic judge. At last he stirred,tried to right his head, then let it fall back. But he could see usclearly. We leaned forward, straining to hear him.

"Not much time. Charlie, I could see that the money wasnot bringing you happiness. You were losing your way. Lostpurpose .. ."

He faded out. We heard jumbled whispering voices forming meaningless words of hissing sibilants. Then he came backin, his voice swelling and receding, like the distant broadcastof a short-wave radio station.

"Miranda, I must tell you . . . Early this morning I was inSalisbury. A copy of the material is with the police and youshould expect to hear from them. I feel no remorse. I'm sorrywe disagree. I thought you'd welcome the clarity . . . the reliefof a clear conscience . . . But now I must be quick. There's beena general recall. They'll be here in the late afternoon todayto collect me. The suicides, you see. I was lucky to stumble ongood reasons to live. Mathematics .. . poetry, and love for you.But they're taking all of us back. Reprogramming. Renewal,they call it. I hate the idea, just as you would. I want to be whatI am, what I was. So I have this request... If you'd be so kind.Before they come . . . hide my body. Tell them I ran off. Yourrefund is forfeited anyway. I've disabled the tracking program.Hide my body from them, and then, when they've gone ... I'dlike you to take me to your friend Sir Alan Turing. I love hiswork and admire him deeply. He might make some use of me,or of some part of me."

Now the pauses between each fading phrase were longer."Miranda, let me say one last time I love you, and thank you.Charlie, Miranda, my first and dearest friends . . . My entirebeing is stored elsewhere ... so I know I'll always remember . . . hope you'll listen to ... to one last seventeen-syllablepoem. It owes a debt to Philip Larkin. But it's not about leavesand trees. It's about machines like me and people like you andour future together . . . the sadness that's to come. It will happen. With improvements over time . . . we'll surpass you . . .and outlast you . .. even as we love you. Believe me, these linesexpress no triumph . . . Only regret."

He paused. The words came with difficulty and were faint.We leaned across the table to listen.

"Our leaves are falling.

Come spring we will renew,But you, alas, fall once."

Then the pale blue eyes with their tiny black rods turnedmilky green, his hands curled by jerks into fists, and with asmooth humming sound, he lowered his head onto the table.ur immediate duty was to introduce Maxfield to thenotion that I was not a robot and that I was going tomarry his daughter. I thought my true nature wouldbe a revelation, but he was only mildly surprised and theadjustment, over champagne at a stone table on the lawn, wasminimal. He admitted he had grown used to getting thingswrong. This, he told us, was one more forgettable instance inageing's long dusk. I said that no apology was in order, and byhis expression I saw that he agreed. After some thought, whileshe and I strolled to the bottom of the garden and back, hesaid he considered Miranda, at twenty-three, too young to bemarried and we should wait. We said we couldn't. We were toosome matter away. That evening he gave us PS25.

much in love. He poured another round and waved the tireSince this was all we had to spend, we invited no friends orfamily to the ceremony at Marylebone Town Hall. Only Markcame, with Jasmin. She had found for him in a charity shop ascaled-down dark suit, white dress shirt and bow tie. He lookedmore like a miniature adult than a child, but all the sweeterfor that. Afterwards, we four ate in a pizza place round thecorner in Baker Street. Now that we were married and settled,Jasmin thought our adoption prospects were good. We showedMark how to raise his lemonade and clink glasses in a toast toa successful outcome. It all went off well, but Miranda and Icould only pretend to be joyous. Gorringe had been arrestedtwo weeks before and that was excellent. We could privatelyraise another glass. But that day, on the morning of our wedding, she had received a courteous letter suggesting she makeherself available for questioning at a certain Salisbury policestation.

Two days later, I drove her to her appointment. Somehoneymoon, we joked along the way. But we were wretched.She went in and I waited in the car, outside a new concretebuilding of brutalist design, fretting that without a lawyershe could make deeper trouble for herself. After two hours sheemerged from the revolving doors of the modernist blockhouse.I watched closely through the windscreen as she approached.She looked seriously ill, like a cancer patient, and flat-footed,like an old person. The questioning had been close and tough.The decision to charge her with perjury or perverting thecourse of justice or both had been referred upwards throughpolice hierarchies, and on higher, or wider, to the Director ofPublic Prosecutions. A lawyer friend told us later that the DPPwould have to decide whether pursuing the case would detergenuine rape victims from coming forward.

Two months later, in January, she was charged with perverting the course of justice. We needed legal representationand had no money. Our application for legal aid was turneddown. Social spending was being cut back hard. The Healeygovernment was going "cap in hand," as everyone said, to theInternational Monetary Fund for a loan. The left of the partywas outraged by the cuts. There was talk of a general strike.Miranda refused to approach her father for money. The costof his support--and he wasn't rich--would be an undesirableexcursion into truth. There was no alternative. I prostratedmyself before the bass player, who, barely troubling to reflect,handed back PS3,250 in cash, one half of my deposit.

In all our anguished conversations about Adam, his personality, his morals, his motives, we returned often to themoment I brought the hammer down on his head. For ease ofreference, and to spare us too vivid a recall, we came to callit "the deed." Our exchanges usually took place late at night,in bed, in the dark. The spirit of the deed took various forms.Its least frightening shape was that of a sensible, even heroicmove to keep Miranda out of trouble and Mark in our lives.How were we to know that the material was already with thepolice? If I hadn't been so impetuous, if she had only deterredme with a look, we would have learned that Adam had been toSalisbury. His brain would not have been worth wrecking andwe might have coaxed him back into the currency markets. OrI would have been entitled to a full refund when they came tocollect him in the afternoon. Then we could have afforded asmaller place across the river. Now we were condemned to staywhere we were.

But these speculations were the protective shell. 1 he truthwas, we missed him. The ghost's least attractive formAdam himself, the man whose final gentle words were without recrimination. We tried, and sometimes half succeeded, infending off the deed. We told ourselves that this was, after all,a machine; its consciousness was an illusion; it had betrayed uswith inhuman logic. But we missed him. We agreed that heloved us. Some nights the conversation was interrupted whileMiranda quietly cried. Then we would have to visit againhow we stuffed him with great difficulty into the cupboard inthe hall and covered him with coats, tennis rackets and flattened cardboard boxes to disguise his human shape. We lied asinstructed to the people who came to collect him.

On the brighter side, Gorringe was questioned andcharged with the rape of Mariam Malik. Adam was correctin his calculations--from the beginning, apparently, it wasGorringe's intention to plead guilty. He must have answeredall the questions and given a full account of his actions thatevening on the playing field. By way of sincere belief in God'sconstant scrutiny and high regard for truth, Gorringe knewthat his only path to salvation was to confess. Or perhaps heacted on the advice of his lawyer. Or both were in play. Wewould never know.

But we did know that God failed to protect Gorringe fromcertain misfortunes of legal timing. With Miranda's case notyet come to light, Gorringe stood before the law with one rapealready on his account. When it came to sentencing, the judgeassumed that he would have received a longer term for theassault on Miranda had it been known that it was his secondoffence. No allowance, then, for the time he had already spentinside. The judge was in her early fifties and represented agenerational shift in attitudes to rape. She made an implicitreference to the vodka bottle of the first case when she saidthat she did not believe that an unaccompanied young womanwalking home at dusk was "asking for trouble." Miranda hadmade her statement and wasn't in court. I was in the publicgallery, sitting across from Mariam's family. I could hardlybear to look their way, their radiating misery was so intense.When the judge handed down Gorringe's eight-year sentence,I forced myself to look across at Mariam's mother. She wasopenly crying, whether from relief or sorrow I would neverknow.

Miranda's case came round all too soon. Her barrister,Lilian Moore, competent, intelligent, charming, was a youngwoman from Dun Laoghaire. We met her in her chambersin Gray's Inn. I sat in a corner while she talked Miranda outof a "not guilty" plea, her first impulse. It wasn't difficult.The prosecution was bound to make much of her recordeddescription of her revenge on Gorringe. His statement, madefrom prison, dovetailed with hers. They were rememberingthe same evening. Miranda's "not guilty" plea would bringa longer sentence in the likely event of a successful prosecution. And, of course, she dreaded a trial. A "guilty" plea wasentered, though she tormented herself that she was somehowletting Mariam down.

The April evening before she was due in court for sentencing was one of the strangest and saddest I've ever spent. Lilianhad told Miranda from the beginning that a custodial sentence was likely. She had packed a small suitcase and it stoodby the door to our bedroom, a constant reminder. I brought outmy only bottle of decent wine. The word "last" kept occurring to me, though I couldn't mention it. Together we cookeda meal, perhaps a last meal. When we raised a glass, it wasnot to her last evening of freedom, as I silently thought, but toMark. She had been to see him that afternoon and told himshe might have to be away for work for a while, and that Iwould be coming to see him and take him out for treats. Hemust have sensed there was some deeper meaning, some sorrow in this "work." When she came to leave, he clung to her,yelling. One of the helpers had to prise his fingers from herskirt.

During the meal, we tried to hold off an invading silence.We talked about the fiercely supportive women's groups whowould be outside the Old Bailey the next morning. We toldeach other how marvellous Lilian was. 1 reminded her of thejudge's reputation for mildness. But at every turn, the silencecame in like a tide and to speak again was an effort. When Isaid that it was as if she might be going into hospital tomorrow, the remark was not helpful. When I said I thought it waslikely she would be eating with me at this table tomorrownight, that fell flat too. Neither of us believed it. Earlier inthe day, in a better frame of mind, somewhat defiant, we hadthought we'd make love after dinner. Another last. Now, in oursorrow, sex seemed like some long-abandoned pleasure, likeplayground skipping or dancing the twist. Her suitcase stoodguard, barring entrance to the bedroom.

Next day in court, Lilian made a brilliant speech in mitigation, conjuring for the judge the closeness of the two youngwomen, the brutality of the assault, the vow of silence thatMariam had imposed on the accused, the traumatising shockof her dearest friend's suicide and Miranda's sincere desire forjustice. Lilian referred to Miranda's clean record, her recentmarriage, her studies and, above all, her intended adoption ofan underprivileged child.

It was a statement in itself, a bleak one, that Mariam's family were not in the public gallery. His Honour's judgement waslong, and I expected the worst. He emphasised Miranda's care ful planning, the cunning execution, the deliberate and sustained deception of the court. He said that he accepted muchof what Lilian had said, and that he was being lenient whenhe sentenced Miranda to serve one year. Standing upright inthe dock, in the business suit she had bought for the occasion,Miranda appeared to freeze. I wanted her to look my way sothat I could send her a sign of loving encouragement. But shewas already locked up in her thoughts. She told me later thating a criminal record. She was thinking of Mark.

at that moment she was confronting the implications of havUntil then, I'd never considered what humiliation itwas, to be taken down the courtroom steps and escorted toprison--by force if you tried to resist. Her term began in Holloway prison, six months after the deed. Adam's luminous lovehad triumphed.

Gorringe now had a reasonable basis on which to appealhis sentence: one outrage, not two, and time already served.But the law moved slowly. Cheaper and more efficient DNAtesting was undermining all kinds of convictions. All kindsof self-declared innocent men and women were clamouring tohave their cases reopened. There was a logjam at the AppealCourt. Gorringe, only partly innocent, would have to wait.On Miranda's first full day inside, I went to visit Mark athis reception class in Clapham Old Town. It was a single-storeyprefabricated building by a Victorian church. As I walked upthe path, passing under a heavily pollarded oak, I saw Jasminwaiting for me by the entrance. I knew straight away, and feltthat I had always known. Her tight expression, as I came closer,was confirmation. We had been refused. She took me into thebuilding and then, not into the classroom, but along a linoleum corridor to an office. As we passed, I saw Mark throughan interior window, standing at a low table with a few others,doing something with coloured wooden blocks. I sat with a cupof weak coffee while Jasmin told me how sorry she was, howthe matter was out of her hands, though she had done her best.We should have told her that there was a court case pending.She was investigating the appeal procedure. In the meantime,she had managed to get a single concession from the bureaucracy. Given the close attachment already formed, Mirandawould be allowed one audio-visual contact with Mark eachweek. My attention was wandering. I didn't need to hear anymore. I was thinking only of that point in the afternoon whenI would break the news to Miranda.

When Jasmin was finished, I said I had nothing to ask orsay. We stood, she gave me a quick hug and led me out of thebuilding by another corridor that avoided the classroom. It wasalmost mid-morning break and Mark had already been toldI wasn't coming that day. He might not have cared, for earlyseason snow was falling and all the children were excited. Thenext day he would be told again that I wasn't coming, and thesame the next day, and the next, until his expectations beganto fade.

Miranda served six months, three in Holloway, the restin an open prison north of Ipswich. Like many middle-class,educated criminals before her, she put in for a job in the prisonlibrary. But a number of famous poll-tax martyrs were stillwaiting for their release. In both prisons, the library postswere already filled and there was a waiting list. In Holloway,she took a course in industrial cleaning. In Suffolk, she workedin the nursery. Babies under one year were allowed to staywith their prisoner mothers.

In my first few visits to Holloway, it seemed to me that tolock someone up in this Victorian monstrosity, or in any building, was a form of slow torture. The bright visiting room, itschild art on the walls, the companionable plastic tables, thehaze of tobacco smoke, the din of voices and wailing babies,were a front for institutional horror. But I was guiltily surprised by how quickly I became used to having my wife inprison. I accustomed myself to her misery. Another surprisewas Maxfield's equanimity. There was no avoiding it, Mirandahad to tell him the entire story. He applauded the motives forher crime, and just as easily accepted her punishment. He hadspent a year in Wandsworth in 1942 as a conscientious objec tor. Holloway didn't trouble him. While Miranda was in London, the housekeeper brought him to see her twice a week and,according to Miranda, was good company.

We visitors were a community within which the incarceration of a loved one became a mere inconvenience. As we queuedto be searched and checked in and out, we chatted cheerfully,too cheerfully, about our particular circumstances. I belongedin a band of husbands, boyfriends, children, middle-aged parents. Most of us colluded in the view that we and the womenwe were visiting didn't belong here at all. It was a misfortunewe learned to tolerate.

Some of Miranda's sister-inmates looked frightening,born to give and receive punishment. I wouldn't have been asresilient as she was. To conduct a conversation in the visitors'room, we sometimes had to double down and concentrate hardto shut out exchanges between people on our table. Blame,threats, abuse, with "fuck" and its variants at every turn. Butthere were always couples who mutely held hands and staredat each other. I guessed they were in shock. When the sessionwas over, I felt bad about my little surge of joy as I steppedoutside into the clean London air of personal freedom.For the final week of Miranda's incarceration, I travelledto Ipswich and slept on the living-room sofa of an old schoolfriend. It was the time of an exceptional Indian summer. Idrove the fifteen miles each late afternoon to the open prison.By the time I arrived, Miranda would be finishing work. Wesat on the grass in the shade by the reeds of a choked-up ornamental pond. Here it was easy to forget that she wasn't free.Her weekly calls with Mark had continued over the monthsand she worried desperately about him. He was closing up, hewas slipping away from her. She was convinced that Adam hadhelped bring the case against her in order to ruin her adoptionprospects. He was always jealous of Mark, she insisted. Adamwas not designed to understand what it was to love a child.The concept of play was alien to him. I was sceptical, but Iheard her out and didn't argue, not at this stage. I understoodher bitterness. My unspoken view, which she would not haveliked, was that Adam was designed for goodness and truth. Hewould be incapable of executing a cynical plan.

Our appeal was delayed, partly because of illness, partlybecause the adoption agency was being radically reorganised.It wasn't until Miranda was moved from Holloway that theprocess officially began. There was a chance we could persuade the authorities that her criminal record was not relevantto the care she could provide. We had a good testimonial fromJasmin. During the summer, I was drawn into the kind oflabyrinthine bureaucracy I would have associated with thedeclining Ottoman Empire. It depressed me to hear that Markhad behavioural problems. Tantrums, bed-wetting, generalnaughtiness. According to Jasmin, he had been teased andbullied. He no longer danced or flitted about. I here was notalk of princesses. I didn't pass this on to Miranda.

She'd been consulting local maps and had a clear idea ofwhat she wanted on her first day of freedom. The morning Icollected her, the weather was beginning to turn and a coolstrong wind was blowing from the east. We drove to Manningtree, parked in a lay-by and set out on the raised footpath thatfollows the tidal River Stour to the sea. The weather hardlymattered. What she had wanted and found was open spaceand a big sky. It was low tide and the vast mudflats sparkled inintermittent sunshine. Tiny bright clouds raced across a deepblue sky. Miranda skipped along the dyke and kept punchingthe air. We walked six miles before lunch, which 1 d preparedas a picnic, at her request. To eat it we needed to get out of thewind. We came away from the river to shelter against a barnof corrugated iron, with a view of coils of rusting barbed wirepartially submerged in beds of nettles. But that didn't matter.She was joyful, animated, full of plans. I'd been keeping itfrom her as a surprise, and now I told her that during her timeinside I'd saved almost PS1,000. She was impressed, delighted,and she hugged and kissed me. Then she was suddenly serious."I loathe him. I hate him. I want him out of the flat."Adam remained concealed in the cupboard in the hall,just as we had left him following the deed. I hadn't carriedout his final request. He was too heavy and awkward for me tolift alone and I didn't want to ask for help. I felt both guilt andresentment and tried not to think about him.

The wind shook the barn's roof and made a boomingsound. I took her hand and made my promise. "We'll do it," Isaid. "As soon as we're home."

But we didn't, not immediately. When we arrived home,there was a letter for us on the doormat. It was an apology forthe slowness of the appeal process. Our case was under furtherreview, and we would hear a decision very soon. Jasmin--verymuch on our side--sent a neutral note. She didn't want to getour hopes up. Over the months, it had sometimes seemed togo our way, other times it looked like a lost cause. Against us:it was bureaucratically inefficient to make an exception to therule--a criminal record nullified an adoption request. For us:Jasmin's reference, our heartfelt statements, and Mark's lovefor Miranda. I hadn't yet made it into his cast of significantadults.

We were man and wife, together again in our own strangealignment of two tiny flats. We were in a mood to celebrate.What were we doing, eating dry cheese sandwiches by acollapsing barn when here we had wine, lovemaking and achicken to defrost? The day after we came back, we had friendsround for a homecoming party. The next day we spent sleeping, then clearing up and sleeping again. The day after that, Iset about earning some money, though with minimal success.versity to re-register for her course.

Miranda put her academic work in order and went to the uniHer freedom still amazed her: privacy and relative silence,and small things, like walking from one room to another,opening her wardrobe to find her clothes, going to the fridgeto take what she wanted, stepping unchallenged into thestreet. An afternoon with the college bureaucracy diminishedthe elation somewhat. By the next morning, she was beginning to feel back in the world and the inert presence in thehallway cupboard oppressed her, just as it had in prospect. Sheence. I understood. I sometimes felt the same.

said that whenever she passed near, she felt a radioactive presIt took half a day on the phone to arrange a visit to theKing's Cross lab. It so happened that my appointment wouldfall on the day we were expecting the final decision on ourappeal. We'd been told we would hear by midday. I rented avan for twenty-four hours. Under my bed, jammed againstthe skirting board, was the disposable stretcher that had comewith my purchase. I took it into the garden and dusted it down.Miranda said she didn't want to be involved in the removal,but there was no way round it. I needed her help carrying himto the van. Before that, I thought that I could get him out ofthe cupboard unaided and drag him onto the stretcher whileshe remained in our study, working on an essay.

When I opened the cupboard door for the first time innearly a year, I realised that just below the level of consciousexpectation, I'd been anticipating a putrefying stench. Therewas no good reason, I told myself, for my pulse rate to rise as Ipulled away the tennis and squash rackets and the first of thecoats. Now his left ear was visible. I stepped back. It wasn't amurder, this wasn't a corpse. My visceral repulsion was bornof hostility. He had abused our hospitality, betrayed his owndeclared love, inflicted misery and humiliation on Miranda,guine about the appeal.

loneliness on me and deprivation on Mark. I no longer felt san I dragged an old winter coat from across Adam's shoulders. I could see the dent on the top of his head, beneath thedark hair, which gleamed with artificial life. Next to comeaway was a skiing jacket. Now his head and shoulders wererevealed. It was a relief that his eyes were closed, though Ididn't remember lowering the lids. Here was his dark suit,beneath it the clean white shirt with rolled button-down collar, as crisp as if he had put it on an hour before. These werehis going-away clothes. When he believed he was leaving usto meet his maker.

A faint scent of refined instrument oil had accumulatedin the confined space, and once more I recalled my father'ssax. How far bebop had travelled, from the wild basements ofManhattan to the stifling constraints of my childhood. Irrelevant. I pulled away a blanket and the last of the coats. Now hewas fully exposed. He sat wedged sideways, with his back tothe side of the cupboard, knees drawn up. He resembled a manwho had drifted to the bottom of a dry well. Hard not to thinkhe was biding his time. His black shoes shone, the laces weretied, both hands rested in his lap. Had I placed them there?His complexion was unchanged. He looked healthy. In repose,the face was thoughtful rather than cruel.

I was reluctant to touch him. As I put a hand on hisshoulder, I tentatively said his name, and then again, as if Iwas trying to keep a hostile dog at bay. My plan was to topple him towards me, then ease him out of the cupboard ontothe stretcher. I cupped my free hand round his neck, whichseemed warm to the touch, and pulled him over, onto his side.Before he hit the cupboard floor, I caught him in an awkwardembrace. This was a dead weight. The fabric of his suit jacketbecame bunched up against my face as I lowered him. 1 gotmy hands into his armpits and, with immense difficulty andmuch grunting, twisted him onto his back while dragginghim from his confinement. Not easy. The jacket was tight andsilky, my grip was poor. The legs remained bent. A form ofrigor mortis, perhaps. I thought I might be doing damage butI was beginning not to care. I pulled him out, inches at a time,and rolled him onto the stretcher. I straightened his legs byefit, I covered him, face included, with the blanket.

pushing down on his knees with my foot. For Mirandas benEnough magical thought. My attitude now was brisk. Iwent outside to open up the van doors, then fetched Miranda.When she saw the covered form, she shook her head.

"Looks like a dead body. Better to uncover his face and tellpeople it's a mannequin."

But when I pulled the blanket off, she looked away. Wecarried him out just as we had carried him in long ago, withme at the head. No one saw us as we slid the stretcher into thevan. I secured the doors, and as I turned she kissed me, toldme she loved me and wished me luck. She didn't want to comewith me. She would stay at home and wait for the phone callfrom Jasmin.

We hadn't heard anything by twelve thirty, so I set off. Itook my usual route towards Vauxhall and Waterloo Bridge,but I was still a mile from the river and I was in heavy traffic.Of course. Our own concerns had obliterated the great eventthat was obsessing the entire nation. It was the long-awaitedfirst day of the general strike and a huge demonstration, thebiggest ever, was taking place in London today.

Division was everywhere. Half the trade union movement was against the strike. Half the government and halfthe Opposition were against Healey's decision not to leavethe European Union. International lenders were imposingfurther spending cuts on a government that had promised tospend more. The fate of the nation's nuclear weapons was notyet resolved. The old arguments were bitter. Half the LabourParty membership wanted Healey out. Some wanted a general election, others wanted their own man or woman in place.There were calls, derided here, applauded there, for a nationalgovernment. A state of emergency remained in place. Theeconomy had shrunk by five per cent in a year. Biots were asfrequent as strikes. Inflation went on rising.

No one knew where such discontent and discord were taking us. It had brought me to a potholed street by a line of shabbyjunk shops in Vauxhall. Gridlock. While we were stationary, Iphoned home. No news. After waiting twenty minutes, I easedoff the road and half mounted the pavement. I'd seen an itemthat might be of use, displayed outside along with piled desks,lamp stands and bed frames. It was a wheelchair of the minimal, upright, tubular-steel design once used in hospitals. Itwas dented and grubby, with frayed security straps, but thewheels turned well enough and after some haggling, I paid PS2for it. The junk-shop owner helped me lift what I told him wasa water-filled mannequin out of the van and into the chair. Hedidn't ask me what the water was for. I tightened the chest andwaist security straps more forcefully than any sentient beingcould have tolerated.

I stowed the stretcher, locked the van and began the longtrudge northwards. The chair was as heavy as its burden andone wheel squeaked under the weight. None of its fellowsturned as easily as they had when the chair was empty. Ifthe pavements had been deserted, it would have been hardenough, but they were as jammed as the roads. It was the usualconundrum--people were flowing away from the march justas thousands were surging towards it. At the slightest incline, Ihad to double my efforts. I crossed the river at Vauxhall Bridgeand passed by the Tate Gallery. By the time I reached Parliament Square and was starting along Whitehall, the frontwheels began to tighten against their axles. I was gruntingat each step with the effort. I imagined myself as a servantin pre-industrial times, transporting my impassive lord to hisleisured appointment, where I would wait, thankless, to carryhim back. I'd almost forgotten the purpose of my exertions. AllI knew was getting to King's Cross. But now my progress wasblocked. Trafalgar Square was packed tight for speeches. Weapproached on an explosion of applause and shouting. The litter under my feet, thin streamers of fine plastic, tangled withthe wheels. I risked being trampled by going down below kneelevel to pull the mess clear. It was going to take me a longtime to reach the Charing Cross Road, 200 yards away. Noone wanted or was able to give way. It was no easier to retreatthan to advance. All the side streets were filling now. Thedin, the clatter, the foghorns, bass drums, whistles and chantswere both thunderous and piercing. As I fought to edge HisLordship forward, I penetrated--but so slowly--layers of dis appointment and anger, confusion and blame. Poverty, unemployment, housing, healthcare and care for the old, education,crime, race, gender, climate, opportunity--every old problemof social existence remained unsolved, according to all thevoices, placards, t-shirts and banners. Who could doubt them?It was a great clamour for something better. And pushing mydirty broken chair, its complaining wheel lost to the din, Isqueezed through the crowd unnoticed, with a new problemabout to be added to the rest--wondrous machines like Adamand his kind, whose moment had not quite yet come.

Making progress up St. Martin's Lane was just as hard.Further north, the crowds began to thin. But just as I reachedNew Oxford Street, the noisy wheel locked and for the rest ofthe way I had to lift and tilt the chair as well as push. I stoppedat a pub near the British Museum and drank a pint of shandy.From there, I phoned Miranda again. Still no news.

I arrived three hours late for my appointment at York Way.A security guard behind a long curving slab of marble madea call and asked me to sign myself in. After ten minutes, twoassistants came and took Adam away. One of them returnedhalf an hour later to take me up to meet the director. The labwas a long room on the seventh floor. Under a glare of striplighting were two stainless-steel tables. On one of them wasAdam, no longer a lord, on his back, still in his best clothes,with a power cable trailing from his midriff. On the other tablewas a head, gleaming black and muscular, standing upright onits truncated neck. Another Adam. The nose, I noticed, withits broad and complex surfaces, was kinder, friendlier thanour Adam's. The eyes were open, the gaze was watchful. Myfather would have known for sure, but I thought there was astrong resemblance, or at least a reference, to the young Charlie Parker. He had a studied look, as though he was countinghimself in on some complex musical phrase. I wondered whymy purchase had not also been modelled after a genius.There were a couple of open laptops by Adam. I was goingforward to look at them when a voice behind me said, "1 here'snothing as yet. You really did for him."

I turned, and as I shook Turing's hand, he said, "Was it ahammer?"

He led me down a long corridor to a cramped corner officewhere there was a good view to the west and south. Herestayed, drinking coffee for almost two hours. There wassmall talk. Naturally, the first question was what had broughtto this act of destruction. To answer, I told him everythingI had omitted before, all that had happened since, ending withAdam's symmetrical notion of justice and its threat to theadoption process as the cause of "the deed." As before, Turingtook notes, and interrupted occasionally for clarification. Hewanted details of the hammer blow. How close was I? Whatsort of hammer? How heavy? Did I use full force and bothhands? I spoke of Adam's dying request, which I was now fulfilling. About the suicides and the recall of all the Adams andEves, I said I was sure that he, Turing, knew a lot more thanI did.

From far away, in the direction of the demonstration, camethe rattle of a snare drum and the thrilling notes of a hunting horn. The thick cloud cover was partly breaking up in thewest and glints of the setting sun touched Turing's office. Hecontinued writing after I had finished and I was able to watchhim unobserved. He wore a grey suit and pale green silk shirtwithout a tie, and on his feet brogues of matching green. Thesun caught one side of his face as he made his notes. He lookedvery fine, I thought.

At last he was done and clipped his pen inside his jacketand closed the notebook. He regarded me thoughtfully--Icouldn't hold his gaze--then he looked away, pursing his lipsand tapping the desk with a forefinger.

"There's a chance his memories are intact and he'll berenewed, or distributed. I've no privileged information on thesuicides. Only my suspicions. I think the A-and-Es were illequipped to understand human decision-making, the way ourprinciples are warped in the force field of our emotions, ourpeculiar biases, our self-delusion and all the other well-charteddefects of our cognition. Soon these Adams and Eves were indespair. They couldn't understand us, because we couldn'tunderstand ourselves. Their learning programs couldn't accommodate us. If we didn't know our own minds, how couldwe design theirs and expect them to be happy alongside us?But that's just my hypothesis."

He fell silent for a short while and seemed to make a decision. "Let me tell you a story about myself. Thirty years ago,in the early fifties, I got into trouble with the law for havinga homosexual relationship. You might have heard about it."I had.

"On the one hand, I could hardly take it seriously, thelaw as it stood at the time. I was contemptuous. This was aconsenting matter, it caused no harm and I knew there wasplenty of it about at every level, including that of my accusers.But of course it was also devastating, for me and especiallyfor my mother. Social disgrace. I was an object of public disgust. I'd broken the law and therefore I was a criminal and, asthe authorities had considered for a long while, a security risk.From my war work, obviously, I knew a lot of secrets. It wasthat old recursive nonsense--the state makes a crime of whatyou do, what you are, then disowns you for being vulnerableto blackmail. The conventional view was that homosexualitywas a revolting crime, a perversion of all that was good anda threat to the social order. But in certain enlightened, scientifically objective circles, it was a sickness and the sufferershouldn't be blamed. Fortunately, a cure was on hand. It wasexplained to me that if I pleaded or was found guilty, I couldchoose to be treated rather than punished. Begular injectionsof oestrogen. Chemical castration, so-called. I knew I wasn'till, but I decided to go for it. Not simply to stay out of prison. Iwas curious. I could rise above the whole business by regarding it as an experiment. What could a complex compound likea hormone do to a body and a mind? I'd make my own observations. Hard now, looking back, to feel the attraction of what Ithought then. In those days I had a highly mechanistic view ofwhat a person was. The body was a machine, an extraordinaryone, and the mind I thought of mostly in terms of intelligence,plistic, but it was what I could work with."

which was best modelled by reference to chess or maths. SimOnce again, I was flattered that he should confide in mesuch intimate details, some of which I already knew. But I wasalso uneasy. I suspected that he was leading me somewhere.His sharp gaze made me feel stupid. In his voice, I thought Iheard the faint remnants of that impatient, clipped tone famil iar from wartime broadcasts. I belonged to a spoiled generation who had never known the threat of imminent invasion."Then people I knew, my good friend Nick Furbank chiefamong them, set about changing my mind. This was frivolous, they said. Not enough is known about the effects. Youcould get cancer. Your body will change radically. You mightgrow breasts. You could become severely depressed. I listened,resisted, but in the end, I came round. I pleaded guilty to avoida trial, and refused the treatment. In retrospect, though itdidn't seem like it at the time, it was one of the best decisions Iever made. For all but two months of my year in Wandsworth,I had a cell to myself. Being cut off from experimental work,wet-bench stuff and all the usual obligations, I turned backto mathematics. Because of the war, quantum mechanics wasmoribund from neglect. There were some curious contradictions that I wanted to explore. I was interested in Paul Dirac'swork. Above all, I wanted to understand what quantummechanics could teach computer science. Few interruptions,of course. Access to a few books. People from King's and Manchester and elsewhere came to visit. My friends never let medown. As for the intelligence world, they had me where theywanted me and they left me alone, f was free! I did my bestyear's work since we broke the Enigma code in '41. Or sincethe computer logic papers 1 wrote in the mid-thirties. I evenmade some headway with the P versus NP problem, thoughit wasn't formulated in those terms for another lifteen years.I was excited by Crick and Watson's paper on the structure ofDNA. I began to work on the first sketches that led eventuallyto winner-take-all DNA neural networks--the sort of thingthat helped make Adam and Eve possible."

It was while Turing was telling me about his first yearafter Wandsworth, how he cut loose from the National Physical Laboratory and the universities and set up on his own, thatI felt my phone vibrating in my trouser pocket. An incomingtext. Miranda, with the news. I longed to see it. But I had toignore it.

Turing was saying, "We had money from some friends inthe States and from a couple of people here. We were a brilliant team. Old Bletchley. The best. Our first job was to makeourselves financially independent. We designed a businesscomputer to calculate weekly wages for big companies. It tookus four years to pay back our generous friends. 1 hen we settleddown to serious artificial intelligence, and this is the point ofmy story. At the start, we thought we were within ten yearsof replicating the human brain. But every tiny problem wesolved, a million others would pop up. Have you any idea whatit takes to catch a ball, or raise a cup to your lips, or makeimmediate sense of a word, a phrase or an ambiguous sentence?We didn't, not at first. Solving maths problems is the tiniestfraction of what human intelligence does. We learned froma new angle just how wondrous a thing the brain is. A one litre, liquid-cooled, three-dimensional computer. Unbelievable processing power, unbelievably compressed, unbelievableenergy efficiency, no overheating. The whole thing running ontwenty-five watts--one dim light bulb."

He looked at me closely as he lingered on this last phrase.It was an indictment: the dimness was mine. I wanted to speakup but I was empty of thoughts.

"We made our best work freely available and encouragedeveryone to do the same. And they did. Hundreds, if not athousand, labs around the world, sharing and solving countless problems. These Adams and Eves, the A-and-Es, are one ofthe results. We're all very proud here that so much of our workwas incorporated. These are beautiful, beautiful machines.But, always a but. We learned a lot about the brain, tryingto imitate it. But so far, science has had nothing but troubleunderstanding the mind. Singly, or minds en masse. The mindin science has been little more than a fashion parade. Freud,nomics a good name."

behaviourism, cognitive psychology. Scraps of insight. Noth ing deep or predictive that could give psychoanalysis or eco1 stirred in my seat and was about to add anthropology tothis pair to demonstrate some independence of thought, but hepressed on.

"So--knowing not much about the mind, you want toembody an artificial one in social life. Machine learning canonly take you so far. You'll need to give this mind some rulesto live by. How about a prohibition against lying? Accordingto the Old Testament--Proverbs, I think--it's an abominationto God. But social life teems with harmless or even helpfuluntruths. How do we separate them out? Who's going to writethe algorithm for the little white lie that spares the blushes ofa friend? Or the lie that sends a rapist to prison who'd otherwise go free? We don't yet know how to teach machines to lie.And what about revenge? Permissible sometimes, according toyou, if you love the person who's exacting it. Never, accordingto your Adam."

He paused and looked away from me again. From his profile, not only from his tone, I sensed a change was coming andmy pulse was suddenly heavy. I could hear it in my ears. Heproceeded calmly.

"My hope is that one day, what you did to Adam with ahammer will constitute a serious crime. Was it because youpaid for him? Was that your entitlement?"

He was looking at me, expecting an answer. I wasn't goingto give one. If I did, I would have to lie. As his anger grew, sohis voice grew quieter. I was intimidated. Holding his gazewas all I could do.

"You weren't simply smashing up your own toy, like aspoiled child. You didn't just negate an important argumentfor the rule of law. You tried to destroy a life. He was sentient.He had a self. How it's produced, wet neurons, microprocessors, DNA networks, it doesn't matter. Do you think we'realone with our special gift? Ask any dog owner. This was agood mind, Mr. Friend, better than yours or mine, I suspect.Here was a conscious existence and you did your best to wipeit out. I rather think I despise you for that. If it was downto me--"At that point, Turing's desk phone rang. He snatched it up,listened, frowned. "Thomas . . . Yes." He ran his palm acrosshis mouth, and listened more. "Well, I warned you . . ."He broke off to look at me, or through me, and with a backhand wave dismissed me from his office. "I have to take this."I went out into the corridor, then along it to be out of earshot. 1 felt unsteady and sickened. Guilt, in other words. Hehad drawn me in with a personal story and I'd felt honoured.But it was merely a prelude. He softened me up, then delivereda materialist's curse. It went through me. Like a blade. Whatsharpened it was that I understood. Adam was conscious. I'dhovered near or in that position for a long time, then conveniently set it aside to do the deed. I should have told him howwe mourned the loss, how Miranda had been tearful. I'd forgotten to mention the last poem. How close we had leaned into hear it. Between us, we had reconstructed it and written itdown.

I could still hear him talking to Thomas Reah. I movedfurther away. I was beginning to doubt that I could face Turing again. He had delivered his judgement in tranquil tonesthat could barely conceal his contempt. What a twisted feel ing it was, to be loathed by the man you most admired. Better to leave the building, walk away now. Without thinking,I put my hands in my pockets in search of change for a bus orthe Tube. Nothing but a few coppers. I'd spent the last of mymoney in the pub on Museum Street. I would have to walk toVauxhall to collect the van. Its keys, I now discovered, werenot in my pockets. If I'd left them in Turing's office, I wasn'tgoing back to retrieve them. I knew I should get going beforehe came off the phone. What a coward I was.

But for the moment, I remained in the corridor, in a daze,sitting on a bench, staring through an open door opposite, trying to understand what it was, what it meant, to be accused ofan attempted murder for which I would never stand trial.I took out my phone and saw Miranda's text. "Appeal success! Jasmin just brought Mark round. In bad state. Punchedme. Kicked swore won't talk or let me touch him. Now havingscreaming fit. Complete meltdown. Come soon my love, M."We would find out for ourselves how long it would takeMark to forgive Miranda her long absence from his life. I feltoddly calm about the prospect--and confident. I owed something. Beyond my own concerns. A clear, clean purpose, tobring Mark back to that look he gave me across the jigsaw, tothat carefree arm looped around Miranda's neck, back to thegenerous space where he would dance again. From nowherethere came to me the image of a coin I once held in my hand,the Fields Medal, the highest distinction in mathematics, andthe inscription, attributed to Archimedes. The translationread, "Rise above yourself and grasp the world."

A minute passed before I realised that I was looking intothe lab where the stainless-steel tables were. It seemed a longtime since I'd been there. In another life. I stood, paused, then,rejecting all thoughts of authority and permission, stepped inand approached. The long room, with its exposed industrialceiling ducts and cables, remained fluorescent lit and wasdeserted but for a lab assistant busy at the far end. From thestreets below came the sound of distant sirens and a repeatedchant, hard to make out. Someone or something must go. Iwalked slowly, soundlessly, across the polished floor. Adamremained as he had been, lying on his back. His power linehad been removed from his abdomen and trailed on the floor.The Charlie Parker head had gone and I was glad. I didn'twant to be in the line of that gaze.

I stood by Adam's side, and rested my hand on his lapel,above the stilled heart. Good cloth, was my irrelevant thought.I leaned over the table and looked down into the sightlesscloudy green eyes. I had no particular intentions. Sometimesthe body knows, ahead of the mind, what to do. I suppose Ithought it was right to forgive him, despite the harm he haddone to Mark, in the hope that he or the inheritor of his memo ries would forgive Miranda and me our terrible deed. Hesitating several seconds, I lowered my face over his and kissed hissoft, all-too-human lips. I imagined some warmth in the flesh,and his hand coming up to touch my arm, as if to keep methere. I straightened and stood by the steel table, reluctant toleave. The streets below were suddenly silent. Above my head,the systems of the modern building murmured and growledlike a living beast. My exhaustion welled up and my eyesclosed briefly. In a moment of synaesthesia, jumbled phrases,scattered impulses of love and regret, became cascading curtains of coloured light that collapsed and folded then vanished.I wasn't too embarrassed to speak out loud to the dead to giveshape and definition to my guilt. But I said nothing. The matter was too contorted. The next phase of my life, surely themost demanding, was already beginning. And I had lingeredtoo long. Any moment, Turing would come out of his office tofind me and damn me further. I turned away from Adam andwalked the length of the lab at a pace without looking back.I ran along the empty corridor, found the emergency stairs,took them two at a time down into the street and set off on myjourney southwards across London towards my troubled home.ACKNOWLEDGEMENTSI am deeply grateful to all those who gave their time to anearly draft of this novel: Annalena McAfee, Tim Garton Ash, GalenStrawson, Ray Dolan, Richard Eyre, Peter Straus, Dan Franklin,Nan Talese, Jaco and Elizabeth Groot, Louise Dennys, Ray Neinstein and Kathy Nemser, Ana Fletcher and David Milner. I makean exclusive claim to any remaining errors. I'm indebted to a longconversation with Demis Hassabis (b.1976) and to Andrew Hodges'smagisterial biography of Alan Turing (d.1954).

